Title: Predicting Novel Research Directions in Big Pharma - Vasilije Markovic, cognee
Event: AI Engineer World's Fair 2026 (session upload, published 20260622)
Source: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=M7-KY0W-BPo, YouTube auto-captions
------------------------------------------------------------

Hey everyone. We work with Bayer, a big pharma company, to build a novel system that I want to talk to you about today. We built a hypothesis research system for hypothesis generation in drug discovery. So Bayer team came to us to ask for an agentic system that would allow them to build and iterate on the corpus of research they already have to predict the areas where their scientists should focus. There was just too much data and they needed a memory system to pinpoint and locate where is the interesting area for research for their agentic workflows. This is not just a pure search problem. The Bayer team needed to effectively understand in which area the hypothesis generation and the scientific discovery should continue and in which area it's not relevant.

And for to do that, Cogni's team needed to understand together with Bayer very specific domain of biomedical research, iterate on it, validate it, and then predict the area of where this future improvements can happen. And to do that, we've solved that by building a custom agentic research system that allows Bayer's agent to use Cogni's memory layer to predict the areas of research the scientists should focus on and thus reduce the time the scientists would take themselves to do this type of operation themselves. Imagine reading 10,000 scientific papers. I'm sure they enjoy it, but to a degree that gets quite tricky and quite extensive. So what we've done is we've ingested the data, we've structured the knowledge using formal traditional ontologies in combination with that LM generated knowledge.

And then, together with that, we built a system that is fully explainable that allows us to validate on synthetic data set and cross-validate on the real data sets on how this data moves and behaves and performs and especially these new novel predictions we are building. This is our breakthrough innovation this this area of where we are kind of focusing the direction forward and you can see here that we did both the ingested generated and shuffled data cross validation and then cross domain validation and we've shown effectively significant results that we'll publish in a paper we are working together with buyer where we are already preparing the poster that should be published in a couple of days.

So this is effectively something that allows buyers team to reduce the human time. Imagine a team of researchers just browsing through this paper trying to automate parts of the entity extraction and memory consolidation and what we try to do here is we try to really build this in a way that the teams there can use it in an automated fashion and iterate on it and understand it. So we've molded this into a repeatable motion. We can run this with other customers. We have this know-how on how to really do this on deep graph embedding level where we can predict this type of relationships and interesting areas not for just buyer but any anywhere else. And if you're interested let us know.

In a sense this is something where we've definitely contributed to buyers team but also to Cognizant's open source by learning building and iterating with them to get this project done.
