Title: Stop Evaluating Models Like It's the 50s - Alejandro Vidal, Mindmakers
Event: AI Engineer World's Fair 2026 (session upload, published 20260626)
Source: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=EfcfUB2uprc, YouTube auto-captions
------------------------------------------------------------

Okay, so this talk tries to actually borrow ideas from psychometrics, which is the field of psychology that actually models how can we measure human intelligence and other traits. And makes sense that we can apply the same ideas to LLM. And I think it's a very promising field to to research and also to apply. Um with this talk I will try to make that a more common knowledge in the industry, which is I think is very useful for benchmark creators and also users of LLMs that are trying to evaluate which model is the good one for for them. And also I will share all the benchmarks, tools, and data set that I'm going to show you here.

So we can kick off this kind of practices in the industry. So I'm going to start with the basics. When we evaluate one model, we have one number per model with a benchmark, which is more or less the accuracy, the number of times that that model got a question right, okay? But if you split that number into different items, into different questions, um if you think about that, we have a strong assumption, which is every item should weight the same into this measure, okay? Which is a huge assumption. For example, two items could be correlated or for example, one item could be pure noise because it's not good or maybe one item is by far more important than others for whatever reason I don't care, but we are not actually modeling that.

And for that we're going to apply modern psychometrics that allows us to actually model in a better way and estimate in a better way everything here, okay? So what I'm going to do exactly? I'm going to order items and models by difficulty and also intelligence here or or ranking on the benchmark, okay? So you can see this pattern and I'm going to keep the entire vector, the entire matrix. Okay, I'm not going to sum anything up. The thing here is with that we're going to estimate two numbers. For each item, I'm going to estimate B, which is the difficulty level of that item. As you can see the shape of the curve for each item is going to be different and one of the factors is going to be how difficult is that.

That curve is actually describing how we map the intelligence of the model against the probability of getting that answer right. Okay, so very difficult questions are going to be like this because it's extremely difficult. You you need a very high intelligence level to get only 50% of the time that that question right. Okay, and the other way around we can see that. Okay, so for each item we have that and for each model we're going to estimate another number, which is going to be theta. Theta is going to be represented here by this number. Okay. So theta is on the same as scale as B. This is a very good property. And is actually distributed with a normal distribution.

Also helps to understand what's is going on here because our model with a theta of zero means that this average on this distribution. Okay. So for example, let me show you one here one example, one item. This one. No. That one. Okay, so here this item for work four, work four has a theta of oh oh .1. Yeah, so that estimates a 67% of probability of getting it right. And actually we got it right with an item of B minus .2. Okay, so that's the curve that we're going to estimate for every item and also every model is going to be estimation of that theta, okay? So, also we are going to have discrimination. Discrimination is going to be how the steeper that curve is.

We prefer that kind of curve because it's more informative. We don't like flat lines because that's pure noise. It's not related with the intelligence level. And we don't want the inverse ones because that means that that item is actually hurting models that are very good, okay? So, with that in mind now we can estimate, for example, from group four, if we pick the real answers, we are going to put all together all the item curves, and we are going to estimate the likelihood of the theta value that maximize that pattern. And with that we can estimate the value. And this estimation is very good because actually we can have a confidence interval here with the distribution, which is something that we get for free in IRT modeling, which is this modeling that we are we are applying here, okay?

So, we can have two cases here. We can have two models with the same theta or similar theta, but different scores, for example, 95 answers and 116 answers. But the other way around is more interesting. For example, Claude here, Opus 4.1 and Gemini 3 Pro, they have actually the same score on the benchmark here, but they have a hugely different theta. They have one standard deviation. And the reason for that is because we pay attention to the actual answers that every model has has has actually in their data set, we can actually estimate the theta with a better prediction, okay? So, with that in mind, we have a lot of applications. So, this is super useful because we can actually audit our benchmarks.

And I'm starting this is cool, so if you want to apply the same ideas to your company or your benchmarks that could be useful, okay? So, we are going to use in this case the parameters of each item to decide which items are good for me or which items I need to go over again or maybe I need to remove them. So, we are going to use a, which is the like the slope parameter, the the information parameter, and we are going to pay attention to that because on the right side here you have like uh standard logistic curve here where the higher the theta, the higher the probability of getting the answer right, okay?

Which makes sense. Also, we have here very flat lines like the ones that I showed you before. We can keep those items if we need more items, but those items are not going to be very informative, okay? We are actually uh wasting time on some of them. But also, what my final words on the other side, we have negative um A's, which means that the item is behaving in a weird way, okay? That is quite common, and actually, you can use a test and a statistical test to find out which items are actually negative. So, you can pay attention to them. It's quite common that um a negative A means that that item is mislabeled or has some kind of error, okay?

Because good models are getting that item wrong, okay? So, for example, here you have two items from a real data set. In this case, it's uh yeah. It's we are asking a a question, and the gold answer, the answer that we have on data set is not right. I didn't know that. I was checking with the LLM. And the same thing here, uh we have a good item that has an older correct answer that is this number one. So, for that reason we have negative A's. So, this is one of the most exciting applications that you can use actually here. And there is one paper that is talking about this application. It's called Tiny Benchmarks.

I highly recommend you that paper. But I'm going to explain how to apply that and with this skill actually you can use that for your own benchmarks. Uh it's quite common for companies to have private benchmarks about their task or their area of interest. And they use those benchmarks to decide which model is worth it to implement on the company, okay? So, do you need to apply the same benchmarks multiple times to different models, maybe to different harnesses, maybe to different uh fine-tunings of the same model. And sometimes we don't need the entire benchmark for that. Okay, so we are going to use IRT modeling to reduce the size of the benchmark. So, let me show you how can we do that, okay?

I'm going to pick two real benchmarks here. I estimated their uh A's and B's. Um and we can actually order them. We are going to start with the most informative item. And we can go with the next one and the next one, okay? So, I'm going to try to get a 99 correlation between the real estimation of the model and the estimation that I get with the the small version of the benchmark, okay? So, we will try to reach that line, okay? Over time. Here time or here the X axis means that how many items I'm going to use um in this whole version. So, as you can see as if we we end up with all the items of the benchmark, we get obviously the same number that we got before, okay?

So, Okay, so now things are going to get uh more interesting, I think. Even if the application are not so obvious with the mathematical framework that we have right now, we can actually get in very interesting answers to different questions that we can have. So, I'm going to use the concept of residuals or outliers to catch a few patterns that makes no sense. And one of them is going to be super useful for benchmark creators because we can actually detect if an item was leaked uh intentionally or not. Um to the internet. So, another model knows about that question, so it's not valid for my benchmark, which is a huge problem. So, as I was explaining before here in this matrix, I can order by difficulty and by intelligence.

So, I can see this pattern from green to red. And if you pay attention to that, you can see weird things. Like for example, here Gemini 3 is getting this question this uh yeah, this question is wrong, but makes no sense because based on beta value of Gemini 3 Pro, we should be able to answer that by far. We have 86 percent of yeah, 86%. And the other way around, we can also have here uh deep seek yeah, deep seek here has a very low probability of getting that right, but even with that, uh uh we got to uh to green questions here, okay? So, we can use that to calculate our residual error, to calculate how unlikely is that to see if we can extract a few patterns from there, okay?

And also, IRT allows you to do that item by item and also user by user. In this case, user is model. So, I can actually calculate which model is the worst one in terms of fitting into the parameters that they have. So, for example here, 04 mini is the worst one because you can see that there is more inconsistencies. Here, we have more green answers among red parts, okay? That's useful, for example, to detect if a model is behaving correctly or is unstable because you have a problem in the I don't know, GPU platform that you're using or whatever. So, this parameter actually can catch errors on inference. Um but also it can helpful for us to detect if a few items has been leaked on the internet.

For example, here, I can have a suspicion that this item here could be leaked on the internet, okay? And with that we can go to the next technique. So, connecting with the previous idea, we can use adaptive testing, which means that I'm going to pick the right items for you on demand. So, for different users, I can use different items, and for different organizations, I can use different items. So, I can have policies like this item should not be exposed to this specific organization, or this item should not be exposed to I don't know, to this user or I cannot expose this item more than 10 times per month. So, you can have a policy of to control how fast your models your your benchmark are being trained on, okay?

So, let's say that we have two organizations that you are kind of suspicious about and you think one of them is actually leaking the data on the internet, okay? So, we are going to have here a private private bank of items and we're going to pick a few of them at random. We are going to try to pick different levels of difficulty because we need a good common ground to share among all organizations to estimate values on the same scale, okay? So, this is really important to pick. And let's say that we have two organizations A and B and for the organization A, I'm going to pick this anchor set. And we're going to pick what we are going to call fingerprint set for that specific organization, which is going to be a set of difficult questions because I want to detect the outliers that are only that are going to be a specific or unique for that organization, okay?

Or at least we are going to try to be to reduce the overlapping with other organization. And for the organization B, we're going to pick another set of difficult items that are going to be different, okay? So, if we suspect that organization A or B is leaking the data, we expect that over time the new models are going to get better for those items depending on the organization that are leaking them, okay? But they are going to get good at those items in a weird way, in an unexpected way, okay? So, we can detect that with residual loss, with with the person fit uh technique that I was talking about before, okay? So, here in this matrix here, I have the receivables.

As you can see here, we have R and all of them you can see here, they are not huge. They are below one standard deviation, okay? So, actually this data is is uh is a synthetic data set, but I trained a model with a few questions. I fine-tuned a model with a few questions from a data set and I tried to actually detect which data set has been leaked. And actually what happens is that I pick the five items that I uh provide to the organization A. I train I fine-tuned a model with those items. And as you can see here, I have a huge average receivables over two standard deviations compared with the other ones, with the control ones, okay?

We need obviously another set of uh organizations and models that are not being um trained on the benchmark to compare with, okay? But with this technique, you can actually detect if you have a leak of information. You can use different fingerprints to detect which is the source of that leak, okay? So, I think this is extremely useful for benchmark grade. So, in psychometrics, it's really important to know if your test is uh fair in terms of uh how we evaluate different groups. So, uh let me show you an example. Sometimes we have an item that is using a term that is only understandable in one country, okay? So, if you use that item, you're actually not um measuring intelligence.

You're actually measuring which country this person is from, okay? So, that's our problem because we are mixing two different traits that you don't want to mix. Uh we can use the same kind of techniques for elements, but not for the sake of fairness, but for the sake of understanding how models behave with different items. So, I'm going to use split the data set into Anthropic and OpenAI. And for each item, I'm going to plot two different curves, one for one group and one for the other one. Okay? So, as you can see here, for the same level of intelligence, I have a huge gap between those two curves. That should not happen, but if that happens, maybe I can find an explanation somewhere.

And if that difference is systematic among different items, I can find those items. This is interesting because actually, if you use those IDs, I'm not going to show the items because I don't want to leak them. But if you go to the database and you go to for you look for those items, you are going to see some interesting patterns. You are going to see that OpenAI gets right a few items that share uh a few properties between them. Okay? So, this is useful to study in which parts your models are good. Um and we can understand actually how they are related between them. Okay? Okay. So, um now that we understand what the proceed was are, uh they kind of behave less uh like a fingerprint.

Okay? We can we can analyze models and we can detect, for example, if a model is distilled from another model or we can detect if a model is trained with the same base model than others because [snorts] we are assuming that if you make the same mistakes or the same kind of mistakes or you have the same pattern of residuals, we should be able to see some kind of connection between models. So, what I'm going to do here is I'm going to pick all the residuals for each model and I'm going to correlate those vectors. I'm going to plot here a correlation matrix, okay? And also I'm going to here to plot that projection, a very simple one, okay?

So, before going into anything else, you can pay attention to the colors of the labs and you can observe that we have a few clusters. They are not extremely clear, but you can actually look at here. You can You can see here that the same family of models have the same kind of errors. Also, we have here DeepSee DeepSee I think. Yeah. This is DeepSee. R1 R1 and R1, okay? So, we can observe some kind of patterns here, okay? But the most interesting thing for me is if we pay attention to the correlations, we can see a few things that are useful. For example, we can detect if model is based on the same checkpoint, which is in this case DeepSee R1.

Two different distillations, they share a lot of their answers, a correlation of point 0.3, actually. And also we can detect, and this is extremely important for myself and for some clients, we can detect if a model has been distilled from another one. And this evidence actually is stronger than actually evidence from the answers. Sometimes we try to trick the model with prompts to know if that model has been trained with choices from another one. But actually, if you pay attention to the signals, you have a strong guard signal to detect that. Also, you have another example. We have the same model but with different effort levels. We have also very strong correlation here, almost the same model.

And also, you can see different generation of the same model that have been Probably they share out of the of the weights, okay? So, again, another example of successors here. From Gemini 3 Pro to Gemini 2.5 Pro, okay? So, this analysis is a huge opportunity to understand what how the market is behaving, how models are related between each other. And also, I think this is an opportunity to improve robust systems. To pick the right model for each task. So, for example, we know we can know if a few models are good in different kind of task or they are anti-correlated, so you should pick between them. Honestly, I think this is only the beginning. There are many other useful applications of psychometrics in LLM evaluations.

I'm extremely excited about a few of them. For example, you can merge benchmarks to improve the quality of all of them together. You can use secondary signals like tokens and latency. And also, there is a cute topic of multi-dimensionality that actually I'm researching right now. I can observe that LLMs and humans are extremely similar in their their structure of intelligence. In any case, if you want to explore any of those things or you are curious about them, please let me know. Thank you so much for your time. I hope that this is going to be helpful for you. I want to share all the materials, all the skills, and all the tools so you can use that in your day-to-day work.
