Title: Turbocharge Your Agent's Retrieval with TurboQuant - Shashi Jagtap, Superagentic AI
Event: AI Engineer World's Fair 2026 (session upload, published 20260628)
Source: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=tB9RKTrU-Ig, YouTube auto-captions
------------------------------------------------------------

Hello. Welcome to the online track. Turbocharge your agent retrieval with Turbo Comp. My name is Shashi. I'm a founder of Super Agent DKR. Today, we will see how you can cut memory cost of agent retrieval five times without breaking your search. So, let's get into it. Before we start the talk, let's try to see what problem we're trying to solve. If you have used any agent or general-purpose agent, you might see in that as context grow, the performance degrade. And it is usually because of the KV cache. If you don't know KV cache, think about like history of your conversation. If you have used the cloud-based models, you probably have not heard of this issue because they handled all the KV cache by themselves.

But if you ever tried loading the model on your own device, then you might have seen this issue by yourself. You need to load your model, and then you also need to load your context, and the KV cache grows as you your context grows. And if you push the context far enough, your KV cache might get bigger than model size. So, if you're using the Mac devices, it gets even worse because hash, your vector index, all fight over one shared pool pool of RAM. So, basically, one thing is clear that your embeddings are using far more memory than they need to. So, by default, it use the full precision, like 32 bits, but search might just need three or four bits.

That means you're wasting the five times memory on your retrieval. So, before Turbo Quant, people use different methods to solve this problem. So, one of them is a quantization. So, quantization allows you to quantize your model into 4-bit, 8-bits that allows model fits into your memory. Model get compressed and fit into your memory. Next thing you probably seen in coding agent is a context compaction. So, when you reach to the end of the context, the your context get compacted and it's summarized for the next session. Some people use a smaller embeddings. Some use offloading of the CPU or disk. But, each of this has a trade-off. You have to compromise your quality, speed, or you probably need a special hardware to do that.

That's where the Turbo Quant comes in the picture. So, let's see what's a Turbo Quant. So, Turbo Quant paper released by the Google research team at ICLR 2026 conference. It is basically a compression algorithm that store embeddings in KV cache in 3-4 bits instead of 32-bits. And that's it. Behind scene, it uses the the two techniques. One is Polar Quant is the another algorithm. And next one is a QJL. So, Polar Quant is basically the compressed the vector. And the QJL fixes any error that has been remaining. So, as you can see there's full full paper on this topic. If you if you're from a machine learning background, you can read this paper. But if you're from the software background, you might find this paper pretty technical and mathematical.

The Google also released the launch post on the Turbo Quant, which explains how it works. And they mentioned this QJL techniques, which using only one bit, and the polar quant. So, you can go through this blog post if you want. But, in a nutshell, what Turbo Quant says is do not store vectors in 32 32-bit. Just just store it into three to four bits. And that's it. The promise of this paper is basically you can put this vector into less than four bit without losing the quality. And that's the interesting part of the compression. And that's the magic the Turbo Quant has under the hood. One idea that worth understanding is search doesn't care what vector looks like.

It only cares what's the closest to your query. It doesn't matter it's a full precision or it's a Turbo Quant. If you use like a traditional compression method, you won't notice it until you see the drop in the quality. So, Turbo Quant basically uses two stages. It you can further distill down to three. In the first stage, Turbo Quant evened out the data by shuffling the vector. And then it rounds to the bucket using the technique called scalar quantization. And in the last stage, which is called QJL, it fixes the remaining error with only one bit. And that's where the magic happens. If you want to use Turbo Quant by yourself, then you probably need to know these three stages or two stages.

And the only thing you need to care about is you pick your budget, like what bits you want to use. And the good news is that everything else is handled by the libraries itself. So, you don't have to tune anything by hand. So, you need to decide basically how far you can push before quality drops. So, ideal sweet spot by the industry is 3.5 bit. But, you can go smaller if it's if it's work for your use case. But, in practice, you can land somewhere near 4 bits. So, right now the Turbo Quant has been adopted by the most of the inference engine that you might be already using. For example, if you're using the local models, you might be using the llama CPP, uh MLX, Ollama, LM Studio.

Everything will eventually get the Turbo Quant baked inside the inference engine. So, you don't have to worry about doing anything by yourself. Turbo Quant can be used for the models KV cache for the inference layer, but it could also be used for your rag and vector search. It can serve the both purpose. It can compress the embeddings in your index. If you're building agents, one approach that we built at Super Agentic AI is Turbo Agent. It's the open-source library that allows you to use your same agent framework, same vector database. You just need to swap the retrieval layer and use Turbo Agent there, and you will get the benefit of the Turbo Quant. You can take similar approach.

You can build your own tool and use a Turbo Cont for your agent's retrieval. For Turbo agents, it allows you to keep your existing agent framework and existing vector vector database. So, the way it works is basically say for example, if you have a Pinecone AI agent, only thing you need to do, use your retriever, whether you're using Chroma DB or any other vector database, you just need to swap the indexing part with the bits you are interested in. And this is where all the magic happens. We got agent, we ask the question. First, we will run with plain baseline float 32 32-bit index. Um then we compress and re-rank it with the smaller size and then run it again.

And by doing that, we'll get the same results much smaller size. We can see that demo right now in action. If you want to see the demo for other vector databases like SurrealDB or Lance DB, they are already available on the GitHub. You can You can play around with that. But for now, let's switch to the local demo. So, I have a demo repo here. So, what I can do, I can run the script. So, first of all, let me show you the script. So, I have agent demo script. Which basically loads the model. The embedded We have baseline retriever and we have a turbo retriever. And then we ask the question, it use the local llama model.

Whatever you provided. And we run it and get the answer. So, let's run the script. And let's use the small model called It's 2 billion model, so that it's faster. Now you can see we're using the quantri embedding model. 0.6 billion with 256 dimension. And we're asking the question. Now you can see the baseline has been loaded with the float 32. And it's using the index memory of of 8 KB. We need to wait for the model to be loaded. And then we'll see the answer. You probably need to wait for some time to model to get loaded, but after that you get the answer from the 32-bit float. An agent has answered it. Now we are using the turbo quant with the comp and re-ranked.

Now you can see the index memory is just 1.6 KB. Which is almost five times smaller than what is being used by float 32. Now you we can you can see that we got the same answer uh from the turbo quant. So, both retrievers grounded answer is a true. But the memory difference you can see is a five times smaller. What change here is we haven't changed any agents. We haven't changed the documents. Only thing we did, we did change is a retriever. And that made And that made a big difference. Let's switch back to the slides. Now we have another demo for the memory. So that the rerank step is what keeps reranking accurate.

So we have another demo. I already ran because it took some time. So it's basically you have a float 32. You have a float 32. You have a turbo count. You can see the quality and the speed there. You can see the result. It's a five-time less memory and retrieval quality preserved. Turbo count isn't one option, but there are some other approaches already available in the market. Turbo count uses three to four bits. Use one method for KV cache and the vectors. And the tooling is still emerging. But there are some other approaches also available in the industry like Rabbit and you, which is available in Milvus, which uses one to four bits. And it is strong for the the big static indexes.

But it only supports the vector search, not the KV cache. There's another approach, which is F does eight bit. And it is already available in VLLM and SGLine. What you can take away from this talk is basically you need to change your mindset and only compress for ranking. As search only cares about the vector which is closest. Not how it look like. You can try Turbo Cont and you can swap one of the retriever that you currently using with the Turbo Cont and see what difference it makes. Start small. Run recall and latency benchmark on your own data. See what result you get. And hopefully you will see some magical results in the retrieval if you use Turbo Cont under the hood.

And if you need a further information you can find uh Turbo Agents on GitHub. You can fork it and make your own version. Or you can try this minimum demos that uses the Lance DB and Serial DB. Or if you have any further questions, you can reach out to me on X or LinkedIn or GitHub. And with that thank you so much for listening to my talk. Thank you.
