Title: Day 2 Opening & Conference Overview
Speakers: Tjas Kuman (IBM developer advocate, MC)
Event: AI Engineer World's Fair 2026 — Day 2: Autoresearch & Keynotes (2026-07-01)
Source: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=4sX_He5c4sI (00:11:14 - 00:14:57), YouTube auto-captions
------------------------------------------------------------

Ladies and gentlemen, welcome to the AI Engineer Worlds Fair. Thank you for joining us as we continue an exciting week of innovation, technical insights, and conversations shaping the future of AI. Now, please join me in welcoming your MC, developer advocate at IBM, Tjas Kuman. Good morning, AI engineer. We are here. We made it. We are here. It is day two. It is such an honor and a privilege to see so many of you here today. This conference has broken records, right? Last year uh was was way fewer. This year, 7,000 people. Incredible. Huge round of applause. This is this is it. This is it. This is where it happens. Listen, there's announcements. There's takeaways. There's content across 18 tracks.

18 track. There's expo sessions. There's breakouts. There's all kinds of things, right? And and undeniably, I'll say this, there is value. Yes. If you've got value, make some noise this morning. Absolutely. Absolutely. I have learned so much uh from so many brilliant people here and and I have no question that you have as well. Uh we had an incredible keynote yesterday. We had so many keynotes yesterday um where where Swick started the conference talking about loops. Um the the theme was was loops. Why is that funny? Um okay, it wasn't a joke but um but we had more keynotes after that about the the golden age of AI, right? Um one thing that really stuck out to me and I'm sure many of us was wiring the agent into the intent upstream really unlocks more work.

When we start to say why things are important, we're able to unlock more work and quality work. We don't just hand it the task, but we say do this and and this is why and this is how you verify, this is how you deploy. We we get so much more done. Um Teresa talked about reliability, how important it is. She talked about the 30x productivity gap between leaders and laggers. Uh showing us that really it's about reliability more than anything else. Um huge focus about evals at this conference. Um, and finally, I I was really struck by by Daksh yesterday who talked about uh reviewing 1 million AI generated PRs and and found some incredible insights.

If you didn't catch that, I highly recommend the videos, the live stream. So cool. Uh, one thing that stood out, Claude, uh, code generates, what was it, three times uh, more off bypass vulnerability code, unfortunately for now, but it's just so cool all the insights that come out of this. Um, today we've got a lot of things. It is jam-packed day and I'm very, very excited about it. There's the newspaper if you haven't yet read the news. We have a newspaper now analog uh just to balance you know the AI. Uh so there's a there's a daily print newspaper available for you. There's a live stream audience. Hello live stream. Thank you for joining. Um there is over 100 expo partners.

Anyone been to the expo? These expo booths are incredible. I've seen so many cool things. There's robots lying around. So much stuff. There's also this cool device that I got the B one of the sponsors. uh it's a notetaker but for in-person meetings. Anyway, check out the expose. It's so incredible. Uh we've got 3.5 days of expo and four uh stages as well, expo stages. So, look forward to that. We want to offer a huge thank you and a massive round of applause for the incredible sponsors. Honestly, this conference would not happen without the support of our sponsors. So, please everybody, your hands together for the sponsors of the conference. We've got Microsoft, the presenting
