Title: Agents in Production: Building and Scaling OG Assist at OpenGov
Speakers: Gabe Dees Mesa (OpenGov, Software Engineer, AI Agents Team)
Event: AI Engineer World's Fair 2026 — Day 2: Autoresearch & Keynotes (2026-07-01)
Source: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=4sX_He5c4sI (01:43:27 - 02:16:04), YouTube auto-captions
------------------------------------------------------------

Hi everyone, my name is Gabe Dees Mesa. I'm an engineer here at OpenGV and today we're going to be talking about agents in production, specifically how OpenGV built and scaled OG Assist. Uh so um this presentation is going to be jam-packed with just so much good stuff. Uh we're going to talk about uh AI agents. We're going to talk about our harness. We're going to talk about um eval observability traces. We're going to talk about um tools and skills. Um it's there's going to be a lot of good stuff in here. We're going to talk to you guys about uh what we do at OpenGV and how we operate at the scale that uh we operate at um in production.

So you'll be able to see a real use case and workload uh with AI agents. Um so without further ado, let's get started. Okay, agenda. So just really quickly going to go through uh high level what we're going to talk about today. Uh I'm going to tell you guys a little bit about OG Assist and what uh Open Gov is. I'm going to tell you guys the origin story of how this all kind of came to be. Uh we're going to talk about OG Assist's uh big bet on effect uh a little bit into our core agent loop. Uh we're going to talk about the A2A protocol, eval. We're going to talk about how we manage long context.

We're going to talk about um monitoring observability, how we collect feedback uh and how we iterate on that feedback. We're gonna lastly uh also talk about tools and skills and how at open gov uh we use um AI not only externally uh that we uh serve to customers but also internally to improve our development workflows. Just a little bit about me before we go any further. My name is Gabe. I'm a software engineer here at OpenGV. I work on the AI agents team and uh I'm one of the folks that helped build uh OG Assist and some of the systems that you guys will be seeing today. So, a little bit about OpenGV. OpenGV is a software company uh on a mission to power more effective and accountable government.

Um so, OpenGV sells ERP software. That's things like budgeting, procurement, asset management, and permitting. And um we were founded about 14 years ago. And what's cool is um we have this thing called OG Assist. And OG Assist is this little button on the top of all of our products in the in the navigation bar. And what's cool is um all of our product suites and product teams um have built tools and skills in order to power this button. So, for example, if I open up uh this this um if I click this button and I open up OG Assist, it says, "Hey, um I'm going to ask about rate codes, which is very specific to utility billing, the current product that I'm in." And you can see that inside of this kind of chat interface, I'm able to speak to an agent, and the agent is able to make tool calls in order to um look up information against data inside of that suite.

So, it's really cool um to be able to kind of first party create these experiences uh through the capability that we've built called OG Assist. Okay, so just a quick story about how this all came to be. So, um, a little while back, we we we saw that AI was really starting to take off and a principal, uh, spun up this new team called the AI agents team and asked me to join and, um, instantly I said yes and OG Assist started to to grow and we started to integrate, uh, OG Assist into all our products and, uh, not only our back-end capabilities, but also our front-end capabilities as well. So, you'll see that one of the capabilities that we give the agent is it's able to um see what's on the screen and and see and and and take action on what's on the page.

So, you could see that um I'm asking the agent here, hey, hey, what's on the screen? Can you maybe highlight uh some of the next steps that I could take? So, you can see that the agent here is thinking. It's saying, okay, what tools do I have available to use? And hey, let me go and highlight something that you could actually click on and and tell you more about it. So just another capability of OG assist and just a little short story about how this all came to be. So the big bet on effect. Um so I really wanted to include this slide because um here on the agents team we made a huge bet to um to to bet on effect and suffice to say it's paid off in dividends.

Um we write effect. So effect is this library for typescript. It's open source and it helps you write better um typescript code. uh you know it's got a lot of uh stuff baked in it like a sk a schema similar to like ZOD if you've ever used that. It's also got um things for error handling uh for logging for traces for uh it's just got so much in there. It really helps write better code and structure your code better and helps with architecture, spinning up new services for uh and and for us on the agents team really helping uh design and build the the core agent loop. So you'll see throughout this presentation sprinkled in um how effect on our team uh has paid off in dividends.

So we we really love effect here at open gov and we encourage other folks to try it out and um yeah let's keep going the effect native loop. So originally we were on lang graph and that was fine until the team really started to scale uh and our use cases started to evolve. So we decided to move over to our own kind of effect native agent loop to have full regency over this uh agent loop such that if we have complex use cases or features that we need to build we could kind of get in we we had full control of the of the agent loop. And not only that but now we're fully on effects.

So all the cool things you get with effect is now propagated throughout the entire agent loop like the tracing structured concurrency, the logging, everything is more fine graining control and it it really allows us to really unlock the full potential uh having our own agent loop from the ground up. Um so another thing I wanted to mention is on the left side you'll see a code example. This is really the basics of the effect loop that we're using. Uh we're using this thing called the effect AI package. And in that package, there's this thing called um there's a chat and a language model. So with the chat, you can instantiate like an a chat for example.

And then you could stream text using um that that kind of stream text function. You could pass in a prompt. And what's cool is uh with a language model under the hood of since we're kind of doing dependency injection, we could pass in a different language model if we were to uh hot swap to another one for example. So really just having full control of our own agent loop just kind of gives us all the levers and it really just unlocks the full capabilities of the model and uh for the team as well to have full agency over this this loop. Another thing I wanted to mention is the agentto agent protocol. So here on the agents team, we've had a lot of success with this protocol.

So this protocol being the protocol that Google created um kind of an open protocol for agents to intercommunicate. But um we found this very useful for uh defining our agent routes for example in the back end and our model and our schema to follow this kind of uh agent protocol. So we modeled so for example there's this thing called an agent card which you see here and it's got the name of the agent a description etc right and having this kind of rigorous protocol this rigorous spec really helped drive our development and drive alignment because you know all we had to do was um align with this spec and follow this spec and we knew that this was kind of the contract that our front end and backend and would both consume and and produce.

So, um this uh I would say also has been uh very helpful for us and and what's really cool is A2A has a lot of extensions, right? So, you could extend the protocol uh add in like metadata. Uh there's also A2I um so lots of fun stuff uh with A2A protocol, but uh this is kind of what's worked for us. So, just sharing that with with you folks. feedback and eval. So here the quote is shipping is the start not the finish. So what we do here uh on the agency team is we have kind of multiple ways we do evals and collect feedback. Um obviously you know we'll have folks uh call in or or email us or or just let us know and tell us but the main way is we have this thumbs up and thumbs down mechanism.

And here uh someone is able to tell us, hey, this this worked really well. This was a great response or that wasn't a great response. And that signal we take and we're able to iterate on uh and we could take it back and help improve uh you know the response in the future. Um we also have automated evals. So in in the in RCI we we have evals that run against real completion. So we could test the prompt against hey did it hit some tools? Did it do what it's supposed to do? And that also helps with our accuracy. So, uh those automated evals in conjunction with collecting feedback really help us um improve our our our tools, our skills, um our harness and and that's really how how we're able to iterate so fast and so quickly.

Humans in the loop. So this is a really cool feature we built where we deterministically interrupt the agent loop. If there is a tool call approval required. So if an agent tries to make a tool call that it needs human approval for it'll show this UI and the human uh can click accept or reject. So explicitly rejecting or explicitly accepting uh the action that the agent is trying to make. And this ensures that uh you know we're building trust and also ensuring that uh you know we're being safe especially when the agent is trying to do a mutating operation and always always always making sure that um humans are in the driver's seat sandboxing. So, another thing that we uh worked on um kind of similar to the safety slide we just saw was um whenever an agent tries to execute code or tries to create files, it does so in a sandbox.

So, we gave our agent sort All right. All right. Hello everyone. Really excited to be here. It's a big room. Very uh very cool conference so far. Uh I want to talk to you today about something that's been on my mind for many many years. This is actually the first time I I talk about it. Sort of my version of going to Mars. Um and that is the Eureka machine. A machine that will eventually invent pretty much all future inventions for humanity. Uh and the way we're going to get there is uh by taking a step back and thinking about what else has given us a lot of really incredible inventions uh namely evolution and how that leads us to automating research and pushing the scientific frontier forward.

And this is uh joint work with a lot of uh amazing folks uh at recursive.com uh and even some uh folks at AIX Ventures. And some of these slides are uh actually inspired by uh and taken uh partially from one of my co-founders at recursive Tim Rockel. So uh why do I talk about evolution and why is it so important? Uh, I think basically evolution is this like open-ended process that has gotten us to a lot of different things that we really like. Uh, it started in biology. It's moving to science, technology, and eventually I. And I think it can inspire us in a lot of different ways to build better AI systems as well.

In fact, uh, whenever we take out and there's this famous saying, whenever I fire a linguist, my accuracy goes up. Uh I think that's true for machine translation back in the day. And it may be true that we should fire all the AI engineers uh and that that are here uh and have them mostly manage an actual AI engineer that is AI and works on AI. Uh and so that may be uh one of the conclusions of this talk. Uh, and I think most of us are going to be excited about it because it means that we'll all become managers of such an AI rather than having to do the nitty-gritty ourselves. All right, so let's start with evolution, right?

The really really big picture, three and a half billion years or so. Uh this is kind of the incredible process uh that has led from you know simple bacteria and plants and fish and amphibians and so on to after many billions of years us. Right? That's that's a good starting point. That gives us some indication that evolutionary processes can do pretty amazing things. Right? But now let's zoom in and uh go maybe down to a few million years. There we can also see how in the very first primitive ways technological evolution has basically increased the world uh sort of product uh in terms of monetary value. It's a little bit harder to estimate in the beginning, but we can see these sort of sequences of exponentials and most exponentials eventually become S-curves.

They flatten out. But humanity has done pretty well by basically developing uh many of these very basic technologies, hunting, farming, but then also thinking about science, the scientific method um in the early days of the enlightenment and of course the industrial revolution. So now we can zoom even further. Uh and no worries, we're eventually going to get to nanohat and actual auto research and and what we're doing. Uh it's a very very quick zoom. Um and now we can zoom down to the last few thousands of years. And what we're seeing there is that with more technology, we were able to sustain more people, right? So when we're working on pushing that frontier forward, uh we're very certain that that will lead to more human flourishing, right?

And especially in the last few uh hundred years, we're seeing this incredible explosion in the population of people because of technology and the evolution uh that it brings and in many cases that evolutionary process is run by us. So it's sort of conscious uh but there are sort of interesting uh inspirations that we can take from that as we're thinking about the evolution of AI in the next cycles. uh in fact and I might not agree with everything with Mark Andreasen but uh he is very smart and we agree on a lot of things. Uh and so I think he wrote this really great uh technoptimist manifesto in which he I think correctly points out that the only perpetual source of growth for the entire economy.

A lot of people worry about AI taking jobs and things like that but the truth is it will very very likely increase uh the economy massively and that will benefit benefit a lot of us. And so the perpetual source of growth is technology. Uh in fact we can go even further and say that there's no material problem and again it's not sort of psychological problems and things like that but no material problems uh that cannot be solved with even more technology. Right? We have a problem of starvation. We invented a green revolution, darkness, light, uh cold, indoor heating, heat, air conditioning and the list goes on. So I think we can kind of realize that this evolutionary process has been going on for a very long time and continues to make a huge amount of progress.

In fact, the progress is so fast that there can within one lifetime be a major major shift. Right? If you're born in 1900, uh then three years when you're three years old, the first human ever was able to thanks to the Wright brothers kind of have sustained motored flight. And then about 60ish years later in 1969, humans flew all the way to the moon. Right? So that within one lifetime, humanity went from like no one can fly for a very long time other than sort of gliding down a hill or something. No one can really fly to we all fly to the moon, right? And so for us, I think what that means is we're probably, and I sometimes say this, we're like too late to explore Earth.

We're too early to explode the stars, but we're right on time to build an AI that could actually do what flying did for some in one lifetime due to intelligence. We can build and move from AI being worse at everything that we do to possibly being better at any specific task that we do, right? And that that will probably be our our 60-year time frame. And because everything moves faster, it might only be 30 years or so. So then uh there's an interesting connection between technology and science and theory right like sometimes the application comes first and then we develop the theory later and then improve the technology sometimes the theory comes first and from that we can build new kinds of technologies and so it's very helpful to think a little bit about the philosophy of science and no better uh to be inspired there than popper wrote that just like in other types of evolution when we choose a theory We also choose one that is best uh in competition with other theories.

Of course, you need if you wanted LMS to do that, they need to find them. You need web search for instance. Um but uh in the theory that best holds its own uh it's one that just like evolution has a certain natural selection process, right? It proves itself. Uh and there is also a sort of survival of the fittest going on in scientific theories. And uh in fact uh a lot of science according to Popper is basically us proposing a new theory hypothesis or explanation or description and then subjecting it to rigorous empirical testing. That is the uh essentially evolution evolutionary pressure of scientific theories. And basically that was a very short uh run through uh sort of the history of of open-ended evolution uh which hopefully makes us all realize that more science will lead to more technology which will lead to more growth which will lead to more human flourishing.

And so that then begs the question does it make sense for us uh to try to just scale up and spend a lot of our resources as humanity to scale up scientific discovery in order to lead uh to this flourishing. uh when when you double click into that you kind of realize um which Dislam uh already realized a long time ago uh that the exponential growth of science will actually be at some point halted by the lack of people working on it right there's so many niche subfields now in all the different areas of science that is very hard to get a million people to work on that particular thing uh and so as a result of this incredible widening of the scope he says uh the number of people focusing on any single section of it has decreased.

And that then leads us to really thinking about how could we automate this and automate scientific discovery. And that then leads us to what I call the Eureka machine. This is basically uh our attempt at trying to build a machine that automates the process of scientific discoveries. And uh in fact I like in a couple months I'll have a book coming out on on this uh exact idea. Uh and so I'll just give you a super high level highlight of how such a Eureka machine could be built for basically everything from physics, chemistry, biology, neuroscience, medicine, uh economics, astrophysics and so on. And there are essentially four pillars that are all extremely important to this machine.

One is of course you have to understand what knowledge is already out there. Uh what uh things humanity has already invented. uh you have to get all the scientific measurement uh data into as the second pillar this machine. Uh then for things that you cannot yet measure we don't yet know you should try to then build simulations. Anything you can simulate you can verify and you can then solve with AI. Uh and if all else fails or at the very end of these processes, you still need to have some kind of uh physical industrial like a lab uh that actually can run real experiments in the real world. And on top of all of this uh you'll have basically uh an agent swarm that will deal with all of these different sources of knowledge and data and experimentations and and rewards.

Uh and in terms of you know the foundational model of knowledge of course we also you know it basically is is a good example of how every single technology we've built so far especially in AI but also before that the internet browsers GPUs and so on we can rethink and there are a lot of startups possible in rethinking every single one of the layers of technology as infrastructure for super intelligence right at UW.com for instance we work on web search for LMS, right, and agents and so on. Uh, and that actually is quite different, right? Uh, agents can read thousands of very long snippets um, rather than just 10 blue links with like a very short snippet.

And so you can rethink each of these different uh, layers of technology that we've built for people uh, and uh, rebuild them for AI in order to use them as tools to then build uh, super intelligence. Now that is essentially uh the sort of why like like we want to build super intelligence in order to automate science. Uh and to me that will be the next big step function change uh in in humanity uh and technology as we know it. Now how do we actually build it? Uh I think the best way to build it is to have it built itself. Right? We moved as a field and especially natural language processing for instance which I've worked on for many years.

We moved from not having linguists, this feels like ancient, you know, BC uh history, uh but before Chat GBT, um we we moved from having linguists tell us a bunch of things about language and then training statistical models on top of that. And when we allowed neural networks to actually automate learning those features with word vectors and uh other neural network architectures and backto-back uh end to-end learning and back propagation, we basically uh were able to get much bigger improvements. Uh then we did a bunch of architecture engineering. Now a bunch of people at least are working on a unified architecture. Uh but even that unified architecture has a lot of manual processes. And so it's clear over and over again in AI that when we take out a manual process and we replace it with a learned system, improvements will follow.

Uh and so that's why I think uh we should try to build a speaker machine by having an RSI that builds itself. And the beauty is that only now um AI can actually do this because AI is code and AI can code. Now this this ability to really code in longer and longer time horizons has really only happened in the last like six to eight months and that now enables such an RSI to work on itself to develop almost a certain sense of self-awareness of its own shortcomings and then fix those shortcomings. Uh and then once we have that machine that has gotten really really good at doing research in AI itself, we can then use it to do AI research for a lot of other things uh in in other scientific fields.

And so at a high level it's quite easy right we have three steps ideation implementation and validation of ideas. That's true for basically almost every scientific field. And so uh to end maybe on some very specific examples uh we have built this first kind of version of such a Eureka machine uh and we wanted to just show that it works on some small uh samples that a lot of people know and are aware of. And so we basically started uh with three things that show you and give you a very first glimpse of and and sort of simple proof points uh of what such a machinery can do. And that was basically better training, faster training and and better kernels uh for for Nvidia GPUs.

Um the first one nano chat um I'm sure many of you have heard of it. A lot of people think that's already recursive self-improvement and it is kind of a weak form in the sense that usually when you do auto research it's it's not recursive self-improvement, right? True recursive self-improvement is when you have an AI that has a sense of self-awareness of its own shortcomings, full access over everything uh in its arsenal from pre-training to RL training and harnesses and everything and then actually updates that entire system in the next version of itself. Now you can also take such a system and just ask it to improve some other process some other AI like a small nanoad run where you can train something in five minutes and that is really exciting.

It's an important milestone but it's not actual RSI. So here basically showed three examples of such an auto research um uh system and what it can do and uh after a very very short time it essentially was able to outperform many uh different teams and teams that also use uh other AI research. So let's double click into some of these. Nanohat is really exciting example. Uh basically you train a very small uh chat model uh in less than uh five minutes and you basically want to have it get to the best possible bits per bite uh number. And so the whole community had worked on this uh for uh quite some time and got to uh 0.93.

And after training this for a little more than a day or two, uh, we basically got it down to 0.91. Um, which is pretty exciting. Now, it wouldn't be that exciting if all it did was just find a couple of hyperparameters um and tune them carefully, but it actually did find truly interesting novel ideas like hash biograms and triam embeddings and tables for those uh and mixing that into various uh value paths of uh the intention through variety of learned gates. So, it actually started to doing more and more interesting things rather than just kind of tuning hyperparameters. Um another one a nano GBPD speedrun. Uh obviously speed is very important. Uh so here we're able to work on this again, apply the system and after a very short amount of time it got better than uh people working often together with the AI for over a year uh on on this very on this benchmark and made the whole thing another two seconds over two seconds faster um at 70 seconds and again discovering uh very interesting ideas in the process.

And then the third one is scuda kernels. Of course, we all care about not burning through our GPU budgets too quickly. Um uh and trying to be very efficient. I think in general, it's actually kind of shocking how inefficient a lot of mixture of expert models still are run in very large clusters that cost billions of dollars and then only have like 30% or so utilization. There's a lot of work that's ongoing in the world uh to improve that. and different fields uh or different groups of people or various different um yeah stages of that. Uh but long story short um lots of different cuda kernels are used during training and testing and here um we basically again took that system and after uh a couple days it discovered better kernels uh than the leaderboard's best uh on the NVIDIA uh benchmark website u by again quite quite a sizable margin across all the different uh categories of of those kernels.

And while we are pretty good at AI and like we actually in the team didn't have any particular CUDA kernel experts who just spent their entire careers writing good kernels. uh but still you know we do just enough to make sure and worked together with Nvidia to make sure that there are no reward hacks here and and other issues but actually found uh that eventually these all checked out and were indeed uh pretty much all the different kernels uh found the best solutions there and so with that I hope I could convince you uh that indeed RSI could be that next big uh scurve um an exponential that gets layered uh on on top of previous exponentials and uh that should help us uh with not just AI but eventually science and then all of technology and then uh allowing many more people uh to flourish on our planet.

Uh and so maybe I'll end on this note here which is uh a lot of people wonder how much longer AI can go right every exponential eventually flattens out and um it's actually quite hard to know like when we even talk about exponential growth in AI what does that even mean there are many different I call them spaces of intelligence and we won't have time to go into all of all of these but as soon as you actually try to define multiple different dimensions of each of these 10 spaces uh that make up this complex like sort of volutric uh thing that is intelligence. You'll realize that there's still so much more to go like on the upper bounds of intelligence.

We're still astronomically far away from reaching those uh across pretty much every single one of uh these dimensions and the spaces uh that they make up. Uh so if any of that is interesting uh and you want to help us build that um we'd love to hear from you. Thank you. Hey everyone, my name is Nishan Gupta
