Title: Recursive Coding Agents & Recursive Language Models
Speakers: Raymond Weitekamp (OpenProse)
Event: AI Engineer World's Fair 2026 — Day 2: Autoresearch & Keynotes (2026-07-01)
Source: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=4sX_He5c4sI (05:56:20 - 06:00:13), YouTube auto-captions
------------------------------------------------------------

Hello there. My name is Raymond Whitampamp and today I'm going to talk about recursive coding agents which is this idea of applying the lessons of recursive language models RLMs uh to coding agents. This is some work that I have done both in my independent research um raw works uh and also more recently in my role at open pros. So to motivate this a little bit, we all want outcomes. We all want agents that are working on our behalf. We want reliable co-workers that are getting things done while we are doing something fun, while we're out on a hike, while we're cold chilling, while we're doing the do. And my argument and my experience is that the bottleneck to this is not intelligence.

The models are intelligent enough. They know all kinds of things. They know the entire internet, but they can't reliably deliver outcomes. And so I can't trust them. So as a very simple example, you know, one day I get almost a fully working SAS app from a single prompt, granted a long prompt. The next day, and I swear this actually happened. Cloud code empties the entire contents of my Salana wallet. Oops. Okay. So, that doesn't really instill trust. So, at the bottom here, we've got this pro this progression. Okay. And we all want to move towards the the one on the right where we're just sort of sitting there meditating and and things are manifesting. And so, where does that come from?

This is from the AI engineer code. It's actually from the back of the t-shirt. Engineer code November 2025. Man, I hope I hope you were there. If you weren't, watch it on YouTube. It was it was amazing. So, here's the thesis. The thesis is today's agents are mismanaged geniuses. The intelligence is there and the missing layer is how do we specify and manage and reuse and verify the work. So this uh framing this phrase the mismanaged genius uh comes from Alex Zang Zed Lee and Omar Katab at MIT. Um and Alex and Omar are part of the authors of the original recursive language models paper. Uh I've also talked a little bit about this recently on touring post.

Um I forgot to mention that these slides are actually a website recursivecoding agents.com. So you can click on them uh by going to this website. So everything I'm going to show in here is is interactive. Okay. What are recursive language models? So I like to say that in an RLM the context itself is the object of computation. Um and this is essentially a marriage of tool calling and reasoning. We're going to talk a lot more more about that in the next slide. But the idea is that the full prompt is not a simple user query. The full prompt is a variable. The full prompt could be a file or many files. Um, and we have this readaluate print loop ripple um that the agent is interacting with in the original paper.

That's Python. And the RLM is instructed to operate symbolically on that prompt. So don't just read the whole thing into your context window. Um, explore it symbolically. And uh even more you don't even directly explore symbolically or maybe you do a little bit of poking around. Hi everyone, I'm Tis. Uh so I'm going to
