Title: OG Assist: Agents in Production at OpenGV
Speakers: Gabe Dees Mesa (OpenGV)
Event: AI Engineer World's Fair 2026 — Day 2: Autoresearch & Keynotes (2026-07-01)
Source: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=4sX_He5c4sI (07:31:37 - 07:34:14), YouTube auto-captions
------------------------------------------------------------

Hi everyone, my name is Gabe Dees Mesa. I'm an engineer here at OpenGV and today we're going to be talking about agents in production. Specifically, how open gov built and scaled og assist. Uh so um this presentation is going to be jam-packed with just so much good stuff. Uh we're going to talk about uh AI agents. We're going to talk about our harness. We're going to talk about um eval observability traces. We're going to talk about um tools and skills. Um it's there's going to be a lot of good stuff in here. We're going to talk to you guys about uh what we do at OpenGV and how we operate at the scale that uh we operate at um in production.

So you'll be able to see a real use case and workload uh with AI agents. Um so without further ado, let's get started. Okay, agenda. So just really quickly going to go through uh high level what we're going to talk about today. Uh I'm going to tell you guys a little bit about OG Assist and what uh OpenGV is. I'm going to tell you guys the origin story of how this all kind of came to be. Uh we're going to talk about OG Assist's uh big bet on effect uh a little bit into our core agent loop. Uh we're going to talk about the A2A protocol, eval. We're going to talk about how we manage long context.

We're going to talk about um monitoring observability, how we collect feedback uh and how we iterate on that feedback. We're gonna lastly uh also talk about tools and skills and how at open gov uh we use um AI not only externally uh that we uh serve to customers but also internally to improve our development workflows. Just a little bit about me before we go any further. My name is Gabe. I'm a software engineer here at OpenGV. I work on the AI agents team and uh I'm one of the folks that helped build uh OG Assist and some of the systems that you guys will be seeing today. So, a little bit about OpenGV. OpenGV is a software company uh on a mission to power more effective and accountable government.
