Title: MC Introduction to Software Factories Track
Event: AI Engineer World's Fair 2026 — Day 1: Software Factories & Keynotes (2026-06-30)
Source: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=htM02KMNZnk (00:08:47 - 00:11:23), YouTube auto-captions
------------------------------------------------------------

Hello and welcome. Wow, look at the size of this audience. This is incredible. A engineer has grown twice the size compared to last year and our expo is four times the size. Thank you to each and every one of you for being a part of this community. Today we have 18 different tracks of content ranging from breakout tracks, keynotes, and expo sessions across all of our time here and all of these different sessions. Today I'm super excited to introduce today's mainstage track called Software Factories. A year ago, Jeffrey Huntley released the Ralph Loop. It captured our attention and sparked our imagination as we saw the Ralph Loop work autonomously overnight on our behalf and create entire products on its own.

However, in the early days, it wasn't perfect. The Ralph loop came recommended for green field work only, and it came with the expectation that it would get you about 90% of the way there. Over the last year, we've learned a lot and there's been considerable amount of advancements made across the industry, which makes now the single largest inflection point for software factories. Model vision has improved, allowing models to see and verify work they couldn't have previously. We also have access to far richer tool ecosystems, allowing agents to access real production data that they couldn't have previously. We've also watched context windows and memory improve, allowing agents in loops to track work that's been done before.

Reasoning models and capabilities have improved, allowing models to take on more sophisticated tasks. Also, AI security best practices have emerged, allowing models and allowing agents to have the security, autonomy, and capability they need to do real meaningful work within the enterprise. All of this comes together now. Software factories are no longer a vision for the future. They become a practical reality. Today's speakers are on the forefront of this shift, and they're going to help us separate what's real from what's hype. what actually works in practice and how to build software factories that produce real results, not SLOB. So, I'm very excited to introduce our very first speaker. His talk is titled on AI and Knowledge.

He's a CVP and distinguished engineer at Microsoft. Please welcome to the stage Pablo Castro.
