Title: Agentic Security: From Code to Autonomous Agents in Enterprise
Speakers: Randall Diggs (Sneak (VP of Marketing, Engineering and AI Orchestration))
Event: AI Engineer World's Fair 2026 — Day 1: Software Factories & Keynotes (2026-06-30)
Source: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=htM02KMNZnk (01:32:00 - 01:37:12), YouTube auto-captions
------------------------------------------------------------

Wow, what amazing content so far. Super excited to tell you more about our next speaker who's introducing the security track. Software factories are only made possible if security is in the loop. Today, engineers have to navigate an ever evolving agent supply chain between skills and software packages that seem to be compromised almost daily. Organizations have to manage identity sprawl as agents increasingly do work on behalf of users and other agents. Security teams have to find ways to govern agents and make sure their access is scoped to only what's necessary for the task at hand. Today, there's an enormous shift that's happening across the industry from traditional application security to agentic security. Randall Daggs, VP of marketing engineering and AI orchestration at Sneak, is helping large enterprise customers navigate that shift.

Randall's here to tell us more about AI engineer security track, which was made possible by Sneak. Please welcome to the stage Randall Diggs. Hello. How's it going everyone? Uh, I'm Randall. Thanks for the nice intro, Ally. And I'm only up here for a couple minutes. This is going to be very brief. But what I wanted to talk about in the time that I have is kind of the state of AI security and the things that I've been thinking about quite a lot lately and maybe things that you've all been thinking about, too. So, I've been a developer and security professional pretty much my entire life. And even though I've been in the security space, the thing that makes me excited in these recent years with the rise of generative AI is being able to build better quality software more quickly.

There's nothing more fun than shipping the things that you're working on to actual users and sparking that sense of joy, right? It almost feels like a cheat code. And I think that there's really a few obstacles to allowing all of us in the room today to do these things at scale in today's world. So the first thing is something that all of us probably learned the hard way a few years ago, which is when you're building software using AI, uh there's always the risk that the code that AI generates might have a security issue. Everybody knows that. It's nothing new, right? And I think the reason that that's not a big deal is because first of all, everyone kind of intuitively knows that when humans write code, we generate security issues.

When AI models write code, turns out they also generate security issues. And so having security as part of your development life cycle is just like a core part of like modern engineering work. No questions at all. I think the second thing though is a little more interesting. It's when you're trying to deploy actual autonomous agents into production. How do you do that in a way that allows you to go to sleep easily and not worry that the agents you deployed are going to go off the rails, do something they're not supposed to do, harm your business or your users or something else, right? And that's a much more difficult problem to solve. And then the final thing that I think is a barrier to us, you know, really innovating and moving quickly is almost geopolitics at this point.

Like I don't know about all of you, but how many people were kind of annoyed when access to Fable got pulled? Show of hands. Yeah, a whole lot of people, right? How many people are a little annoyed they can't use the brand new OpenAI GPT 5.6 model right now? Yes, a lot of people. And I think it's interesting because this is all related to security, right? Like fundamentally the biggest problem that I feel we have to still solve in our space is being able to use AI fearlessly and have it be secure by default. And so that's why I'm really excited to announce that right after this keynote downstairs on the second floor in room 2005, we're going to be running the first security track at the World's Fair for the entire day with some of the best companies and presenters in the world talking all about these problems and how we can fix them going forward.

So if security is a concern to you like it is to me, please come downstairs, join us again. Room 2005, second floor. Uh we have presenters from Nvidia, Anthropic, Keycard, where Ali works, uh Sneak, of course. We have a ton of amazing content and it's hopefully going to allow you to level up the stuff that you're building and do it without any worry at all. So that's really the goal. So with that being said, thank you so much for the time and hopefully I'll see you down there. Um I'm Randall and I'll be ming the event all day. All right, take care
