Title: Mobile Development Workflow Reimagined: Cloud Sandboxes and Agents
Speakers: Zion (10X (Mobile Software Engineer))
Event: AI Engineer World's Fair 2026 — Day 1: Software Factories & Keynotes (2026-06-30)
Source: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=htM02KMNZnk (03:24:06 - 03:32:33), YouTube auto-captions
------------------------------------------------------------

Hi everyone, 10X. You feel it yet? Hi, my name is Zion and I'm a mobile software engineer for the last 14 years and I'm here to talk to you today about 10X, reimagining the mobile dev workflow. So, you know, back in the old times when cursor was that thing you make with your mouse and AI agents were that dystopian character from sci-fi books or movies, whatever fits your style, you know, just a few months back then when we thought that we will still be using our IDE just maybe slightly better. And now we know that we already switch to like chat style um engineering when we discuss with cloud code codex cursor whatever um and we just tell them what to do and we don't use our IDs unless it's for debugging or something that the agent couldn't figure out and that in theory should have made us 10 times more productive right that's what everybody says right with are we 10 times more productive do you feel it I don't know because I can't feel that we are 10 times more productive not as single engineer and not as a whole group and not as the whole company.

So why is that? Why don't we don't see the promise of 10 times more productive came to an actual life. So you know they tell the story about how when factories switched from steam engines to electric engines at first they didn't see that big of a gain. So yeah, the electric engines were better. They were more efficient, but they didn't see that 10x, 20x, 30x uh more productiveness that they have been promised. And the reason for that was that they only changed the steam engine with the electric engine. But the real gain came some years afterwards when they understand that it's not only about changing the engine, it's about changing the whole workflow. Because you see, they used to have like one giant big steam engine in the factory and all of the machines were rearranged based on their power consumption and their proximity to that steam engine.

So it wasn't organized by the workflow that it should have been like from the start to the end of the workflow. No, it was designed by proximity to that central engine. When they realized that and they also realized that they could take the electric engine, make it smaller and put it inside each machine and then they rearranged the factory to make it work as the workflow should because now it it was made possible. Then the real gain came. Now they were 10 times, 20 times, 30 times more productive than they were before. Not because of only changing the engine but of changing the whole workflow. And that is what I want to talk to you about today.

Let's think how AI make things that weren't possible before possible now. And we can change our workflow and then becoming 10 times 20 times more productive. To do that, let's look at the current workflows. The PMs have an idea. They iterate with the designers. They iterate with the user. They iterate with the dev. They iterate then back with the designer. Then they iterate with the QA. And they iterate back with the dev. And maybe after all those iterations maybe you have something in production. So what was that word that was repeating so many times? Yeah, iteration. And this is the problem because iteration creates friction. Each iteration creates context switch create time waste creates communication that needed to be done syn synchronization that needed to be done and AI didn't eliminate all of that AI sped up code but didn't eliminate the friction didn't eliminate the iteration why is that so let us reimagine what we could do bear with me for a moment what if what if What if instead of using one tool for designing, another one for testing, another one for coding, and then another one for releasing, what if we could use one tool, one codebase?

What if instead of designing on Figma, then sending a design doc to the developer in order for them to figure out how to um make those uh designs alive? What if designers could actually design own code and then send the developer a PR? What if QA could iterate with the agent itself, just getting a link with the simulator and they can tell the agent exactly what to test, what to be cautious of, and if they find something, exactly what to fix? What if we could make the dev workflow works on the code itself? What if God was one of us? No, sorry, I got carried away there. And you're probably asking, how can we do all of it?

So one way would be to tell everyone to just download their Xcode and and their Android Studio and teach designers and PMs and QA how to build and how to uh test on simulators, emulators and blow to their laptops with a 200 GB on storage and uh whatever they do to the to our memory. That's one way. But let me guess that most of them would reject that idea and for good purposes. So we can make another way. Maybe we just put it in our CI, right? So we let the agent iterate with the CI so they don't have to download Android Studio and Xcode and everything. But you actually know that CI builds take between 20 to 40 minutes.

And we can't actually let our agent wait for 40 minutes just to understand that the iOS code that it pushed actually failed to build. So what else? What can we use? Introducing cloud sandboxes. So cloud sandboxes are actually concept that has been around already for many years just not for mobile development yet. Using cloud sandboxes, you can tell the agent here's an here's a CLI. Talk to the CLI. Create a VM, a small VM that runs only for this iteration. The VM boots up in 30 seconds or less. Make the build. show them a simulator on their inapp browser in the cloud code, codex, cursor, whatever. And then they can iterate over it, tell it to change that button, uh to go back and test something and change the code and they push and open a PR and then the designer can work on code, send a PR to the developer after they done.

Developers make an iterations make one, two, three, four different VMs uh to run in parallel. They send the PR for review. QA can take it from there and tell the agent exactly what to test and tell it what to fix and from there it goes straight to the stores for review. So let's see it. Let's see how it should work. So imagine you see this screen. Imagine you're inside Codex for example. You have the chat interface to your left. You have the actual app to your right. The designer is iterating with the agent. tell it exactly what they want them to do, what they want to change and see the changes immediately on their screen.

Build time is faster. It's done on the cloud and preview time is faster. Then they either some more not with the developer but with the agent on their laptop without the need to install Xcode or Android Studio. And once they done, they can tell the agent to take that code, open a PR and send it to the developer. This workflow is what makes us 10 times more productive. Not only because of using AI, but because of using AI to change the workflow, reimagine it and remove all that friction that we took from for granted in the old times. That is how we become 10 times more productive. Thank you. Okay, I want to tell you a story about a
