Title: OG Assist: Agents in Production for Government Software
Speakers: Gabe (OpenGov)
Event: AI Engineer World's Fair 2026 — Day 1: Software Factories & Keynotes (2026-06-30)
Source: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=htM02KMNZnk (05:15:42 - 05:26:30), YouTube auto-captions
------------------------------------------------------------

open gov built and scaled ogassist. Uh so um this presentation is going to be jam-packed with just so much good stuff. Uh we're going to talk about uh AI agents. We're going to talk about our harness. We're going to talk about um eval observability traces. We're going to talk about um tools and skills. Um it's there's going to be a lot of good stuff in here. We're going to talk to you guys about uh what we do at OpenGV and how we operate at the scale that uh we operate at um in production. So you'll be able to see a real use case and workload uh with AI agents. Um so without further ado, let's get started.

Okay, agenda. So just really quickly going to go through uh high level what we're going to talk about today. Uh I'm going to tell you guys a little bit about OG Assist and what uh OpenGV is. I'm gonna tell you guys the origin story of how this all kind of came to be. Uh we're going to talk about OGs uh big bet on effect uh a little bit into our core agent loop. Uh we're going to talk about the A2A protocol, eval. We're going to talk about how we manage long context. We're going to talk about um monitoring observability, how we collect feedback uh and how we iterate on that feedback. We're going to lastly uh also talk about tools and skills and how at open gov uh we use um AI not only externally uh that we uh serve to customers but also internally to improve our development workflows.

Just a little bit about me before we go any further. My name is Gabe. I'm a software engineer here at OpenGV. I work on the AI agents team and uh I'm one of the folks that helped build uh OG Assist and some of the systems that you guys will be seeing today. So, a little bit about OpenGV. OpenGV is a software company uh on a mission to power more effective and accountable government. Um so, OpenGV sells ERP software. That's things like budgeting, procurement, asset management, and permitting. And um we were founded about 14 years ago. And what's cool is um we have this thing called OG Assist. And OG Assist is this little button on the top of all of our products in the in the navigation bar.

And what's cool is um all of our product suites and product teams um have built tools and skills in order to power this button. So, for example, if I open up uh this this um if I click this button and I open up OG Assist, it says, "Hey, um I'm going to ask about rate codes, which is very specific to utility billing, the current product that I'm in." And you can see that inside of this kind of chat interface, I'm able to speak to an agent, and the agent is able to make tool calls in order to um look up information against data inside of that suite. So, it's really cool um to be able to kind of first party create these experiences uh through the capability that we've built called OG Assist.

Okay, so just a quick story about how this all came to be. So, um, a little while back, we we we saw that AI was really starting to take off and a principal, uh, spun up this new team called the AI agents team and asked me to join and, um, instantly I said yes and OG Assist started to to grow and we started to integrate, uh, OG Assist into all our products and, uh, not only our back-end capabilities, but also our front-end capabilities as well. So, you'll see that one of the capabilities that we give the agent is it's able to um see what's on the screen and and see and and and take action on what's on the page.

So, you could see that um I'm asking the agent here, hey, hey, what's on the screen? Can you maybe highlight uh some of the next steps that I could take? So, you can see that the agent here is thinking. It's saying, okay, what tools do I have available to use? And hey, let me go and highlight something that you could actually click on and and tell you more about it. So just another capability of OG assist and just a little short story about how this all came to be. So the big bet on effect. Um, so I really wanted to include this slide because um, here on the agents team, we made a huge bet to um to to bet on effect and suffice to say it's paid off in dividends.

Um, we write effect. So effect is this library for Typescript. It's open source and it helps you write better um, TypeScript code. uh you know it's got a lot of uh stuff baked in it like a sk a schema similar to like zod if you've ever used that. It's also got um things for error handling uh for logging for traces for uh it's just got so much in there. It really helps write better code and structure your code better and uh helps with architecture, spinning up new services for uh and and for us on the agents team really helping uh design and build the the core agent loop. So you'll see throughout this presentation sprinkled in um how effect on our team uh has paid off in dividends.

So we we really love effect here at open gov and we encourage other folks to try it out and um yeah let's keep going the effect native loop. So originally we were on lang graph and that was fine until the team really started to scale uh and our use cases started to evolve. So we decided to move over to our own kind of effect native agent loop to have full regency over this uh agent loop such that if we have complex use cases or features that we need to build we could kind of get in we we had full control of the of the agent loop. And not only that but now we're fully on effect.

So all the cool things you get with effect is now propagated throughout the entire agent loop like the tracing structure currency, the logging, everything is more fine grading control and it it really allows us to really unlock the full potential uh having our own agent loop from the ground up. Um so another thing I wanted to mention is on the left side you'll see a code example. This is really the basics of the effect loop that we're using. Uh we're using this thing called the effect AI package. And in that package, there's this thing called um there's a chat and a language model. So with the chat, you can instantiate like an a chat for example.

And then you could stream text using um that that kind of stream text function. You could pass in a prompt. And what's cool is uh with a language model under the hood of since we're kind of doing dependency injection, we could pass in a different language model if we were to uh hot swap to another one for example. So really just having full control of our own agent loop just kind of gives us all the levers and it really just unlocks the full capabilities of the model and uh for the team as well to have full agency over this this loop. Another thing I wanted to mention is the agentto agent protocol. So here on the agents team, we've had a lot of success with this protocol.

So this protocol being the protocol that Google created um kind of an open protocol for agents to intercommunicate. But um we found this very useful for uh defining our agent routes for example in the back end and our model and our schema to follow this kind of uh agent protocol. So we modeled so for example there's this thing called an agent card which you see here and it's got the name of the agent a description etc right and having this kind of rigorous protocol this rigorous spec really helped drive our development and drive alignment because you know all we had to do was um align with this spec and follow this spec and we knew that this was kind of the contract that our front end and backend and would both consume and and produce.

So, um this uh I would say also has been uh very helpful for us and and what's really cool is A2A has a lot of extensions, right? So, you could extend the protocol uh add in like metadata. Uh there's also A2UI. Um so, lots of fun stuff uh with A2A protocol, but uh this is kind of what's worked for us. So just sharing that with with you folks feedback and eval. So here the quote is shipping is the start not the finish. So what we do here uh on the agency team is we have kind of multiple ways we do evals and collect feedback. Um obviously you know we'll have folks uh call in or or email us or or just let us know and tell us.

But the main way is we have this thumbs up and thumbs down mechanism. And here uh someone is able to tell us, hey, this this worked really well. This was a great response or that wasn't a great response. And that signal we take and we're able to iterate on uh and we could take it back and help improve uh you know the response in the future. Um we also have automated evals. So in in the in RCI we we have evals that run against real completion. So we could test the prompt against hey did it hit some tools? Did it do what it's supposed to do? And that also helps with our accuracy. So, uh those automated evals in conjunction with collecting feedback really help us um improve our our our tools, our skills, um our harness and and that's really how we're able to iterate so fast and so quickly.

Humans in the loop. So this is a really cool feature we built where we deterministically interrupt the agent loop if there is a tool call approval required. So if an agent tries Okay. Hi everyone. Uh I'm Solomon. I am
