Title: User Signals Die at Retrieval Boundary: Agent RX and Runtime Experience
Speakers: Prem (Styling Search/Reflect)
Event: AI Engineer World's Fair 2026 — Day 1: Software Factories & Keynotes (2026-06-30)
Source: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=htM02KMNZnk (05:40:40 - 05:49:34), YouTube auto-captions
------------------------------------------------------------

and co-ounder of styling search and today my top user signals die at retrieval boundary. So we'll look into uh what are agents essentially why agent fails what is uh the cause of fails in retrieval particularly and how to make actually signal cross the retrieval boundary and how to make your agent basically outcome fair. So uh let's get started. What is an agent? An agent is an LLM that has agency to reason, invoke tools, uh interact with the real world, retrieve uh the memory to complete the task. One major loop here is missing is uh learning. It should also learn from what worked and what it didn't work. Suppose uh if I have to uh explain what is agent, I can explain with react agent.

So if I have to explain uh what agent is, I'll explain it with react agent. So basically user prompt the agent uh and execute it in a loop uh kind to a retriever search and then pause when the task is complete. This is very basic react architecture. One thing that is missing is how to make agent learn from the outcome. So Asian keeps failing at the same task got reported 85% of AI just fail. So it's in McKenzie's 2025 report. The problem came out to be most of the time is that retrieval is static. 73% of uh our app pipeline fails because of retrieval not generation and context stuffing. So a recent uh uh post from Ram Shria the execto of Pine cone said uh we have been optimizing for the wrong thing.

You are paying a lot for your agent's memory. It is probably broken and we have been optimizing for the wrong things. We made wrong answers appear faster and cheaper but we forgot to make retrieval learn. So why this is does does it matter? Again uh the third column is agents are not outcoming for. So there's a missing layer between evals and action. Your obsibility has all the traces or all the stack that capture. Observility is the stack that capture every tool call every LM completion every exceptions. Your EVA suite judges whether the final output was correct or wrong. Basically pass or fail. But these evils are not reflected in agent uh context, skills, MD files or agent action in any ways.

Right? So the agent doesn't has any access to why yesterday's runs uh runs past or fail. EVA signal dies in the dashboard. This is a missing layer. a system that consume traces, absorb eval and convert both into retrieval guidance for future runs. So there's a manual improvement tax and engineer actually has to sit and see if the email and obserility perform well, rewrite the prompt, redeploy it, upgrade either upgrade to expensive model, restructure to or harness or fine tune the custom models. Why are current memories failing? why memories was designed to actually address this but uh uh it's not. So let's see uh what we have in as a current system uh and current memory is that they basically store user preferences, profile, conversational history or long lived personal personalization.

So chart experience is not self-improving learning systems for production. If you see uh the already existing approach in the uh market there's a uh lang chain uh there's me zero which does extracted f references it uses retrieval signal is embedding similarity does it learn from our code? No. Uh so we have come up with something called utility score which is a similarity weighted by how useful it is for the agent to execute the task. It has actually the history of past precess and past outcomes. So we came up with agent RX and that is agents with runtime experience. It's a runtime layer that let production agent improve from experiences without pre-training, fine-tuning or manual prompt training.

Uh it's a bit different from compile time like DSPI because uh you bake in all the lessons in the prompt. Here it's actually improving uh while it is executing. So this uh again introduces uh utility score. So you do not retrieve by keyword. You retrieve by semantic similarity the current task weighted by whether those memories have historically helped or hurt the execution or the outcome. The EI outcome becomes a first class signal in the retrieval reanking and not just one of the key things is it treat memory as reasoning not as facts static fact with no context and no history but reasoning like suppose uh if uh if there's a if there is a customer support B looking for refund it will not say hey user prefers uh uh dark theme or user prefers uh to be called by a shorter name.

It's actually a reason about the query like uh if some someone asks for refund you should check the settlement before refunding it so that the the the customer doesn't get paid uh refund twice. So rank based on usefulness context is updated based on task. So this is a very big thing uh because most of the agents fail with context stuffing and this has been brought up in the past and learned from history and reasoning right talking about benchmarks. So uh we have benchmarked uh our memory system reflect with on tow bench which essentially measure if agents have followed the policy well or not. So we have seen uh the uh uh the performance improve from 66 to 76% without baking in uh skills and with skills uh reflect performance at 80.

So um once there are uh enough memory like 10 uh memories uh what we do is we bake in the uh reasoning and the understanding into skills so that your agent always remains updated. What happens most of the time we have seen suppose you have a product SQL agent and there's a system there's a column in system prompt even though that column is not useful anymore it remains in the system prompt so there's no system right now that can update that hey there's no column uh right now called this so maybe probably you shouldn't entertain it in the future and this is possible with skills that uh because agents always uses uh calls that skill uh updated skill all the time and the similar behavior has been seen in GPT 5.4.

Uh we have also benchmarked it on agentic task which essentially test a model's ability to reason, plan and use tools over extended multi-step workflows rather than measuring a static Q&A. So you can see here uh with the suppose the human last exam uh with rag you get 47.5 if it is starting from the baseline 35.7 uh with the memory system it gets to 58.2 but with the ref memory system uh it gets to 61.3%. So this uh this kind of trend is shown in another uh agentic benchmarks uh as well like big code bench like long TV etc. Okay. Hello. Okay. Before I get started
