Title: Agents, Tokens, and Strategies: Rethinking How Tokens Do Work
Speakers: Caitlyn (Anthropic), Angela (Anthropic)
Event: AI Engineer World's Fair 2026 — Day 3: Harness Engineering & Startup Battlefield (2026-07-02)
Source: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=I2cbIws9j10 (02:09:51 - 02:33:37), YouTube auto-captions
------------------------------------------------------------

turning my second brain into my living research memory. Let me explain. So, within my second brain, I currently have over 5,000 notes in Obsidian and another 5,000 notes in Readwise and some scattered in Notion and Google Drive. And all of this is growing on average with 250 files per month. And this is what I want. On the left, you can see my whole obsidian vault, this huge mess. And whenever I start working on something such as an article, a new project, a new codebase, a new feature or whatever, I want to actually pull high signal nodes that are actually useful for my current work. And you would ask yourself, why not use directly calledex code or notebook LM?

And the thing is that I am, but you need a system that sits between those harnesses and your second brain. Okay, so let's go back to the root of my problem, which is that I'm always losing my research. For example, my reading list is a graveyard. When I'm scrolling social media and I have that cool expost, a new article, a new new YouTube video, a GitHub repository, it doesn't matter. Whenever I actually want to start working on something, I never recall what I have in my second brain or I have to spend a ton of time actually finding meaningful notes that I can use in my work, right? And another problem that I have is that I want this system to actually be anchored into my personal notes, into my personal values, into my personal faith.

I want this system to be personal, to reflect my own thoughts, right? And that's why in today's video, Luis Franuis and I will teach you how to build your own AI research OS. This also comes with code, so you can also try it out yourself. And I'm Pauline. I'm the founder and CEO of Decoding AI where I do a ton of content on courses on how to ship air products and I'm also the co-author of the LM engineers handbook bestseller and the system the air research OS that I will teach you in this video is the system that I use in my daily work and now I will pass the torch to Luis Francois. Thanks Paul.

So I'm Lu France Bush. I'm the co-founder and CTO of Towards AAI where we build educational courses and I'm also the creator of what's AI a YouTube channel where I explain AI engineering techniques. I used to explain AI research before now focusing on AI engineering. I'm also the author of the book building for production and before that I was a PhD student. So I honestly make research for a living. I used to do a PhD as I said in AI and doing tons of research and research work. Now I build courses, I write videos, I research for videos, I build trainings for companies for a living. And all of these things that I do start with a very good research and also leveraging tons of knowledge and insights that we get at towards the eye from building for clients.

So I have tons of nodes as well just like Paul and we try to leverage them the best possible and as you'll see we build some sort of tool to leverage our second brain where as you'll see there will be some differences between how I use it and how Paul uses it and that's the core goal of the repository that we built and on this project is that we want you to adapt it for your needs. The whole goal is how can we make research better? But more specifically, how can we better leverage what we have? So, let's dive into it. And first, we need to figure out which tool to use and when. Because this whole research system that we built is not for every query.

If you just need a fast answer like a few quick questions or just something where that that you would just Google basically well obviously just Google it or ask JGBD cloud whichever system you want but the problem when doing that is that if you have a lot of following up question or it's a bigger project that you need to build on uh and have basically a very long context or tons of information to share relying on chibbity isn't ideal And it also means that you are fully dependent on the architecture that openai or trag. So the next step here is to ask yourself for a more complex problem. Do you need to act quickly or do you want to build some next feature and and do something very difficult?

If you just have a small repo for a quick change or write one article, just do one thing that you know won't be repeatable that much, definitely use codeex or cloud code or some agent that you trust. Sometimes you need to keep on digging to make it better, to improve efficiency, may optimize it more. And so typically when you have to do that, you want your research sources, your research to stick and to be able to refer to them in the future. So if you want a process like this where the sources that you find, the notes that you take stick around in time and have an agent be able to leverage that efficiently and being able to come back to these information to ask follow-up questions to digest content even more.

And right now for instance when I make a new video I want also the agent of the system to understand the previous videos I made to not duplicate content to not repeat myself and to refer to some other content. In this case there are some tools that are very interesting that you might have tried before like notebookm that is super powerful to do research to digest content efficiently and to come back to it. But the problem with notebook is that it's well first the main problem is that you don't own it. You cannot do anything you want with it. You cannot personalize as much as possible. It's not agent native and it's obviously weak for coding tasks since it's just browser based.

So it's far from ideal from something that Paul and I needed and that most AI engineers need in general. So if you need your agents to be able to leverage all you do, uh whether it is a big research, a new video, whatever you write, you do, you code, you typically want your other agents, your other projects to be able to leverage what you learn from what you just did. And one thing that we advise, especially for production, obviously for a product, is to build some sort of retrieval rack pipeline with vector databases. But this needs an infrastructure. It's not really human friendly to be able to digest quickly, to check notes, to make edits.

It's hard to inspect by hand. You need to build everything around it. It's definitely far from ideal for just something I want to use on a daily basis. Obviously, it's super powerful at scale, very interesting, especially in a product. But as I said, this project is for us, and I don't want something live, super professional as a product. I just want something I will use and that my agents and different projects can leverage as best as possible. So the last question to ask ourselves here is that if you want everything there but more personalization. So, a personalized research assistant that builds some sort of Wikipedia that compounds over time and it and is easily inspectable and usable where you have tons of sources, documents, videos, comparisons, implementations, new research, new topics that you keep on adding and that you keep on wanting to leverage and review easily.

This is where you may want to build something yourself. And in our case, we built the personalized research OS that we will share in this talk with exactly what we built and how. But the downside is that it definitely needs a bit more setup than just opening cloud code. Right now, the main problem with using cloud code and other agentic tool is that you give codec links, PDFs, and different information. For example, my most recent loop engineering video and then the next session you use codeex, you have to paste it all again or ask it to use skills and whatever structure that codeex or jgpd whatever tool that you use built on the fly to leverage what you did, the scripts it ran, the scripts it had, you all lost it or kept it inside a skill that you have to ask it to reuse and that usually isn't ideal and just grows and grows over And the problem is that all this information that you give to the model is not the bottleneck.

The bottleneck is how can you leverage it in the future. Meaning that with an agent, the context window becomes everything. The database, the file system, the memory, the reasoning space. It has to do it all. And when you stop the conversation, it loses everything. And the thing is that we don't need necessarily to provide more and more and more context for a better research. you need a proper memory and context management and ideally some personality with it especially in my case when I do videos. So what we did is that we decided to build a system with plain files mostly markdown files that we can leverage easily and that agents can leverage easily. I won't detail it very much here because Paul will talk about it in depth and as I said Paul has like 5,000 or something notes.

I have just a few hundred. But that's just to say that we need to consider that we didn't start from nothing. We already both had some sort of large database. In my case, I made hundreds of videos and I take many notes. So, I still need to leverage these years of content that I already made and tons of meetings that I have with uh my team, with clients when we build for them that I want to leverage as well because we learn a lot by building for people. Um, welcome everyone. Um, I'm Nikita Kotari. I'm a senior member of technical staff at Salesforce. Uh, where I'm building AIdriven enterprise solutions. If you might have heard of agent force, agent force for setup, headless 360, I worked on all and it's like amazing features.

Um, I also worked at Amazon and LinkedIn previously. Um, in last 6 months or a year we completely changed the way we used to work. We are building new systems. We are evolving and there are some critical uh aspect of using MCP CLI and skill. So today we are uh going to deep dive into a critical yet often overlook aspect of building AI agents. It's plumbing. As a developer we of we talk a lot about model sizes, reasoning capability and the prompt engineering. But when when it comes to building production ready AI agents, the way an agent interacts with the environment, it's tooling layer. It's what actually makes or breaks the application. We will look into three distinct approaches which is MCP, LCLI and the structured skill and map a clear rubric for what to use when.

Uh at the end of this talk, you'll have a clear mental model for choosing between these three tooling layers. Um, here's something every team discovers the hard way. Building demo agent takes like an afternoon. But when you actually want to ship the same thing into the production, it could take a quarter because we are looking to build the reliable, secure and fast agents. Nobody wants to leak their customers data into the production. So testing uh reliability is still a major issues with this AI agents. So uh I want to talk about these three problems. The problem one is the context explosion. Uh consider a scenario where you load a 50 tool schemas into a agent's context window and suddenly 60% of your thinking space is burnt before even this task even starts.

Your agent forgots the diff because uh tool definition for monitoring databases and the deployments file the window. It literally doesn't have a room to think. Uh the second yet critical problem is invisible failures. The agent made a like consider example where agent made a seven tool calls to draft a PR. Something went wrong. The PR was created on the different branch. Um so first you lost like lot of time to redo the work and the second thing is somehow you lost the confidence on your agent to perform a particular task and the problem three is the security surf. Uh consider example at 2 am you got a customer issue you are investigate getting a customer A's error but wait LLM has a broad access to the query and the tenant data and it accidentally started looking into customer B's data so that is a multi-tenant platform issue and it's not a just a bug it's a huge compliance nightmare so let's talk about how we can use this three um two uh three layers to build the reliable help fast and the secure um agent agents.

Um so we have the CLI. CLI is like handling someone a screwdriver. Here is a tool just run it. Direct execution. The agents run a command, gets output and moves on. Then we have a layer two which is MCP. MCP stands for model context protocol. This is just like giving someone a USBC hub. Here is a universal adapter that works with any services. Just use this and work on it. And third we have the skill. The skill is giving someone a runbook. Here is a step-by-step execution of this task. Just go and perform it. So it's structured and it could work with any of the platform or any of the system. So CLI knows how to do they execute command directly.

MCP knows what is available and skill knows how to do it. So now let's dive deeper into one of each. CLI they are readable. Any engineer can look at the command and see what's exactly happened. They are reproducible. If something fails at 2 am, you can copy paste the same command, run it on your machine and you can reproduce the same error. And they're composible. You can pipe multiple commands into one and you can run. The heristic is simple. If I want to want you to remember this, if a engineer on your team can open a terminal to do this, the agent should probably able to do the same thing. we have the structural input and structured output.

Um, and it's it's highly highly uh usable. I think we have been using the CLI for more than 50 years now. So it's it's not glamorous but they are proven and it works. Then we have the MCP. MCP is consider it as a universal C adapter like um every device has its own charger but the universal uni USBC is standardized where you can connect any device to your um connector. So on one side you can see you have the clot, RGPD and the coding tool and the other side you can connect the different services like work item tracker, code search, error tracking, monitoring maybe real life examples could be uh get slack um and Google and everything.

So uh at the bottom you see uh what the what this looks in practice. The agent calls the code search dot search with a query and it gets a structural result back. So it does the it handles the indexing across the millions of files and enforces the tenant isolation at the server level. This is how you solve the security problem too because every time you will connect the external services via MCP protocol there is a O and you will give uh permission to access those services. Third thing is the skill. This is one of my favorite uh tool and I think I have automated all of my work that I'm doing right now at my workplace with the skill because it's highly reliable.

It's fast and you can tweak it it in a lot of different way. Um skill is a structural playbook that wraps around your tools. It defines the rigid orchestration. When a condition is met, ensure the this prerequisite is exist and then execute step one, step two or step three sequentially using the CLI, MCP and explicitly handle um handle those edge cases. Uh it prevents the guesswork, it saves the memory and it's standardizable like you you only choose like I only want like two MCPS to connect to this skill. So you don't have to go and look into all of the MCPS to perform a particular task. Now um let's talk about the problem that we discussed earlier.

I have a 50 uh MCP um tools connected to my system. So before running any task, my 15,000 to 20,000 tokens are already burned and I lo I lost like lot of context before even starting my agent. Uh so you can see on the one side you have like a whole lot of um tokens and how you could replace the same thing by using the skills. So keeping the 55 tools from the five different MCP servers active at all times that cost us it caused the latency issue platform issues you can just simply define the number of MCP servers that that will needed to execute that particular task. Uh so here are like some of the examples like fixing a test failure.

So you don't need to go into all of your MCP tool to just to fix one uh test failure. You can only look into the logs. You can look into the release log or and GitHub to fix your test test failure. And for the draft PR and the investigation escalation, let me dive a little bit deeper into it. So consider this slide uh where we are um drafting a pull request. So what do you need? um you need like um the first agent records the draft PR skills. Step one requires the understanding of the local changes instead of heavy API. It hits the fast scope CLI commands and then you you need a git command to create a uh get pull request on the correct branch.

So you can literally write down the steps. You can create a skill and you can keep modifying it to achieve the best results. Then again another thing is the investigation a bug. Um if midnight you get a any customer bug I mean the first thing you're going to do is like looking into the logs uh searching for the error pattern looking into the uh recent releases if there is a bug in the code or things like that. So you already know that like what you are going to do. So you can automate everything with limited number of MCP tools and the CLI to make a world-class skill to debug your customers issue. And now let's talk about the security.

A golden rule of the agentic development is enforce the isolation in your infrastructure never in your prompts. So prompt can be injected but the infrastructure cannot. For CLI the blast radius is full shell access. Uh so you mitigate um mitigation must include the sandboxing and the strict containerization for MCPS. The blast radius is limited to the explicitly exposing the tools and the tenant tenant isolation and that guarantees at the server level and we have some of the principles that we can always think about while building any agent that like we shouldn't be sharing any credentials with our agent. The tenant isolation is the infrastructure enforced. We can always use the permission gate um gets to um operate at the security level and uh we can provide the least privilege while performing any task to the agent.

Now when when you are deciding which layer to use like every time you cannot create a skill or every time you cannot just explode to use all of the MCP tools. So you need to ask these three question in order to get the best results. The first one is like who else needs this. If it's just this agent just then use a CLI. If the multiple agents are going to use this service then use MCP. If multiple workflow shares the same procedure then use a skill. The second question you can ask yourself is like what is the failure mode that matters the most. If it's a transparency and the reproducibility go for the CLI like we have seen like how we can like reproduce the issues using the CLIs while it is very difficult if you go for um the agents because you don't know what they are doing in the background.

If you need need a validation in the tenant isolation then go for the MCPS and if you need the sequencing guards then go for scale. And here are the three uh third question that like whether you your context is tight. If it's generous then you can go CLI you can explore all the MCP tools and get your results. If it's very very tight then absolutely you need a skill layer um and on demand orchestration of the MCP tools uh to save the money as well as you can improve the latency. And to wrap this things up, uh, I want to leave you with the three foundational architecture take takeaway. Keep your context clean, uh, give only don't use like all of the MCP tools available to perform any task.

Give them the convert your um, most of your workflows into the skills to get the best results. Um, portability has a cost. MCP serves are incredible but they introduce network latency, protocol abstraction and infrastructure complexity. So we need to pay that uh cost deliberately for shared services, indexing and the isolation. So choose your MCPS very wisely and never be embarrassed by the CLIs. It's been 50 years we are using the CLI. They are highly composible, debuggable and battle tested. So embrace your agent framework and um convert all of your workflows into the skill. Also one one of the takeaways is like you know keep your skill as a code. So whenever you are making any changes to your skill make sure that like it's reviewed by the peer uh peer and keep uh updating it over the time and you'll get the best result.

So that was for today. Um thank you so much um for um attending this talk. If you have any question or anything feel free to reach out to me on LinkedIn. Thank you. Hi, I'm Amole, CEO of Nori Agentic. We
