Title: Thinking Like the Model: Using HTML for Agent-Native Graphics
Speakers: Amole (Nory Agentic)
Event: AI Engineer World's Fair 2026 — Day 3: Harness Engineering & Startup Battlefield (2026-07-02)
Source: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=I2cbIws9j10 (02:50:03 - 03:01:00), YouTube auto-captions
------------------------------------------------------------

Hello everyone. Good morning. My name is Michael Greenwich. I am the founder of work OS and I'm here to talk with you today about agents and specifically about how we can make agents more autonomous and allow them to access more services on the web. So let's jump in and get started. Shout out to those of you in the front row also. I see you out here. So about a year ago, software engineers were writing code like this. We were using AI, but we would prompt it and then we would write a little bit of code and then prompt it again and it would write some more code and you would continue to do this human in the loop interactive software engineering.

Later in the year we had things like Ralph loops if any of you remember those where we kind of automated this but more or less this is the way that we were working. It was this human agent human agent back and forth. However, as models got better and better, they were able to write more and more code and run for longer periods of time. And so today, a lot of software engineering looks like this. You write a single prompt and then the agent can spit out a lot of code. And sometimes it can actually build the whole feature, maybe even a whole product, and maybe run for not minutes, but uh hours and hours or even days and days.

This has really transformed the way that we all write code. I don't write code by hand anymore. Probably you don't as well. And it's not just this one thread. You can actually parallelize this. So there's many different tools out there including, you know, the major code coding harnesses from the labs that allow you to run many of these in parallel. The limiting factor here, really the bottleneck is your brain. How much context do you keep in your mind to keep all of these going at once? And this has transformed software engineering. People can be more productive. I think we've all seen in the industry how much faster things are moving. At the root of all of this is actually agentic engineering agents going from these token prediction language models to reasoning and now longunning processes that can actually do things autonomously for us.

And what I think we've seen in software engineering here around agentic workflows is going to come to a lot of different categories. It won't just be engineers that have this way of working. It'll be people in many different fields. Agents are the next big thing. I think a good reference for this, a way to think about it is actually what's been happening with vehicles. So, you know, this looks like a pretty modern car. It has a, you know, digital display on it. This is probably what you would have bought in the last, you know, 5 to 10 years. But if you live in San Francisco or one of the cities with these autonomous vehicles, you've probably seen that we're starting to delete the interface.

No longer do you get inside of the car and actually, you know, pull up your phone and get maps where you as the human are in the loop. There might be cruise control, but you're still in the loop. Instead, these are autonomous systems. You just say where you want to go, you get in the car, you don't even say anything, and it just takes off and takes you to your destination. I remember the first time I got into a Whimo, I was blown away. Mind totally blown. And then after about 3 seconds, I pulled out my phone and started scrolling X. It became commonplace. And I think we've seen this already happen with engineering. The power of agents allows us actually to work and think at a higher level for us to you know exercise more of our executive function versus just planning and execution.

There's a question here of what do agents need to be successful actually when they execute what do they need? Well, first they need a runtime a sandbox. They need somewhere that they can run that needs to be safe, secure, performant. They also need tools. They have to be able to go do stuff in the world. An agent's not very useful if it can't take actions. So, it needs tools. Third, it needs context. You know, these new models with the power of the intelligence in them, it's kind of like taking the smartest person you know and dropping them into a company or a project or a team where they don't know anything. They can't really get anything done.

They need to have context, information about the system, information about the goals. They need feedback. So, a way that they can actually run and validate that they can check that their work is correct. And if it's not correct, keep going. And last but not least, of course, they still need human review. This might be code re review. This might be other forms of evals. This might be forms of checking their work to make sure that these agents are sort of aligned with your goals. The LLM, the intelligence engine, this new technology we've created in the last last few years, you can think of as like an engine. It's like a really high performance, you know, I think this is a a V8 engine.

You know, puts out a lot of horsepower. It can convert fuel into, you know, output. But an engine by itself isn't very useful for a car. You need to drop this into the actual car itself. You need the chassis, you need the transmission, you need the drivetrain, you need the wheels. And only with all of that is it going to be effective to take you places. And this is what a lot of people refer to as the harness. Harness engineering is this new domain where if the models get better but you don't have a good harness you know it's not going to be very effective so as the models improve we change our harnesses we adapt them to it and those things that I mentioned earlier are sort of a form of a harness so agents execute within these harnesses to get stuff done and they they need all of those elements to actually be effective and when they drive they drive really really fast.

So, say you have one of these agents that's going off. You prompt it to go build something for you. You know, it spins for a while. It says, "Okay, I'm going to need this feature and this feature and I'm going to need a database and I'm going to need, you know, this uh, you know, system to deploy and I'm going to need, you know, maybe this thing for image resizing or video transcoding or sending email or whatever." And your agent can actually go do all this research and build all these systems. And today, what's happening with agents is they're actually selecting vendors. You've probably seen the rise of some of these systems where you know like the CEOs will tweet about their growth graph and it really takes off and it's because agents are picking them.

They're picking their systems for sending email or deploying code. Their systems for storing data today. Actually, it might be more important to build for agents than to build for people. Agents are kind of this new consumer class. I'll talk about that in a bit. There's this uh kind of popular thing that people say in San Francisco, Silicon Valley, make something people want. This comes from Y cominator, you know, the startup factory from Paul Graham. And I think it's time to maybe edit this a little bit. And going forward, we also need to think about making something that agents want. There will be more agents in the future than people. Maybe even today. They'll be faster to spin up.

They'll do things quicker. They'll be making decisions on our behalfs. And so, if you want to build for the next era of consumers, you should be building for agents as well as people. But there's a problem today. You can access the web. You can access mobile. But agents themselves can't really access systems. Your business probably isn't open for agents today. Even though there's a lot of them out there, they can spawn very quickly. The door is not open. And we think this is because there's a missing primitive. Agentic registration, agent registration. There's a lot of great stuff around agents connecting and bringing context to systems and different open source frameworks, but that first step of an agent actually signing up for a service is actually missing.

It hasn't been solved and it's a huge blocker to getting adoption. For the last like 20 years, maybe 30 years, automated traffic on the web has been bad. We've tried to block all of it. And so there's all these systems that we've put in place to detect automated actors and stop them in their tracks. DOS prevention, credential stuffing, and attacks. The login box, for example, is very hardened against agentic registration today. Not intentionally, but just because of the legacy systems of what we've built. And it's very hard to distinguish between what's a good automated user versus a bad automated user. If any of you have used any of these like cloud-based uh browser execution environments, one of the selling features they often have is to break captures, which is pretty wild.

You know, we're trying to go backwards. The capture today though is is still kind of dead. There's rampant abuse. There's lots of token fraud. And so, we need to find a better way to allow the good agents in and then block the bad agents, right? Because like I said earlier, if you don't build for the agent economy, your product might not win. It might not be successful. Today's signup flows assume that a human can read the landing page, that they can fill out a form, you know, put their email address, their password in it, that they can solve a capture, that they can verify their email, not just put it in, but go click something somewhere.

Remember, an agent probably doesn't have an email address. If it's signing up for a service, it needs to have a, you know, a human can choose a plan to pay for it. You know, human can copy the API key out, paste it somewhere, use it somewhere else, and really even a dashboard. Think of a dashboard experience. It's not really agent native. All this stuff is built for people. It's kind of a human interface, not an agent interface. Agents need something else. They need native discoverability. Can they register for a system? Are the doors open for agents or not? Capability declaration. What can it do? Registration intent. Why are you registering? What are you trying to do within this?

Or the intent to actually just sign up. There's a lot of stuff around risk here. So for an agent native registration, maybe you want to you're not sure if the agent signing up is going to be good or bad. So you need to actually do a risk assessment of that. There might be different forms of identity verification for an agent. If something like claude is going and signing up, maybe it can bring the user's identity with it or if you have a you know open claw or like your PI harness or something else, maybe it doesn't bring the user's identity and gets verified out of band. There's the whole thing around organizations doing this. So if I'm building something within a company, how does my company identity come in?

You know, my organization entitlements, permissions, credential issuance, auditability, the list goes on. There's so many things that need to be changed. In fact, probably most things need to be changed going from, you know, human registration to agent registration, agent native systems. I'm sorry to say MCP is not enough. Probably more than anybody, I'm a big MCP fan. We've done a bunch of events in San Francisco around MCP. I see somebody wearing one of our run MCP shirts up here that we made. Love MCP. MCP is great for connecting, for providing tools, skills, context, but it doesn't solve the registration step. Today, authentication through MCP requires your human to still be in the loop. You give consent.

You add an MCP server, say for Post Hog to Claude, you sign in with your Post Hog credentials. What we're talking about here for agent native registration needs to happen without the human involved or at least not involved initially. So we've been working on this for a while and our proposal to this is a new
