Title: Agent Registration and the Open Standards Revolution (o.md)
Speakers: Michael Greenwich (Work OS)
Event: AI Engineer World's Fair 2026 — Day 3: Harness Engineering & Startup Battlefield (2026-07-02)
Source: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=I2cbIws9j10 (03:04:40 - 03:11:00), YouTube auto-captions
------------------------------------------------------------

service or something certainly if you access the physical world, you you maybe don't want to give anything away for free. It's very application specific. So here Cloudflare says, "Okay, we're willing to let you deploy maybe for 72 hours or something like that. Get the identity. Boom, boom, boom. Go through. It's called ID Jag is what the standard is. And then it returns back and says you're set up with a Cloudflare account. Now in this experience, my you know human I didn't go click anywhere. I didn't sign up anywhere. It just it just got the token. I can make a couple small tweaks. It knows how to use Wrangler. Want me to make those changes? Go ahead.

Does anybody prompt their agents like this? It's just like yes, yes, do it, please. Not really saying much. It's able to write the Wrangler, get the thing set up, go through the full deployment process, and then boom, it's live. We actually have this working as a live demo. We did some collaboration with Cloudflare on this too. It's pretty cool. And you can tell the prompting that I was giving through this not exactly rocket science. The agent could just run through the whole thing actually. There's nothing actually that I was doing through prompting it other than just approving approving approving. It should be able to do this one shot. This is what it looks like graphically.

So agent registration with offd you have your agent harness pi for example. within that is your LLM, maybe your memory, different, you know, context layers. It connects to your backing identity service. So this is the user identity and when that agent goes and registers, it sends the discovery call to Cloudflare. It looks for that aund or whatever service. We also have this working with fire call. It's pretty cool. It sends that ID JAG, the identity JSON access grant. It's essentially a signed credential that represents the user says this is an identity receives back the access token actual API token and then boom it's it's done you can make normal API requests you can call MCP everything else still works so you can see that OMD is just for the registration step your normal API keeps working the rest of your docs don't have to change it's just that registration step for agents but with the simplicity comes actually an enormous amount of power because suddenly it lets agents do things end to end.

I hate the planning step. When I write something, I just want the agent to go do it. Usually it kind of knows what I'm trying to get at and I want to come back to actually a running prototype and not like, hey, here's my long plan. Here's a bunch of services to sign up for. If I'm building new prototypes, especially, I would prefer it just to get deployed on something for free so I can see it and click around and not put me through the burden of going sign up for all these different vendors. And that's what OMD allows for. And if you're a service provider, if you're building APIs or services, this allows you to become a customer of those systems and you can think about it increasing your growth funnel starting from, you know, maybe just humans and adding the whole world of agents on top.

Pretty great. We think this is going to be huge. Your door will be open for agents to actually sign up, register, use your services. This should be an immediate growth boom for your products. And I'm not saying everything that agents are going to build will be useful. Maybe not everything they build will go into production or last that long, but some things will. Just like with PLG or Premium before that, this is the way to grow your business and get more customers and actually become, you know, larger and more successful. And where there's usage, we believe there's also intent to pay. There's a lot of interesting work being done for agents to actually pay for stuff.

There's crypto-based protocols like X42. There's other things that the payment providers are building, but we think that should be downstream. We don't want payments to be upfront. We don't want to have to force your agent to sign up with a credit card. That seems backwards. We moved away from that in the world of SAS. With OMD, agents can sign up, they can register, they can start using it, and then downstream choose to pay on your terms based on your own pricing, based on your own model. If you don't believe me or on the headless type of products, this is Mark Beni off. He's the CEO and founder of Salesforce, the guys at the big building here in town.

They believe in agents more than anything. Our API is the UI. Entire Salesforce and agent force Slack platforms are now exposed as API, MCP, and CLI. talk about going agent fork first. A company that many people consider to be sort of a legacy SAS vendor really invented the category of software as a service. They're getting rid of their dashboard and UI. I mean, they're not getting rid of it, but they believe that agents are the future. So, if you're not thinking about this, I definitely encourage you to start building some prototypes, talking to users, because you don't want to miss miss this. If you want to use this, this is available today. We have open spec for it.

There's a GitHub repo. You can actually have your agent go implement it. I know it's kind of meta. It's an open spec. Work OS doesn't control it. We have a version of it that we host, but you can build it yourself. You can run it yourself in your existing systems. I think this is so important that no single vendor owns this. It's one click enabled if you use user stuff, but you can build it on whatever platform you want instead. here at Moscone which is pretty awesome. In January of 20h 2007 I believe Steve Jobs introduced iPhone and I was in college and I remember yeah like first year of college I remember this super super clearly.

It was the next great software platform that got built. So many companies got started because they could build on top of these devices. smartphone revolution and there hasn't really been a moment like this since I think in the the era of technology at least for me the stuff we did around B2B SAS and cloud and all that is great but this was a totally new paradigm a new software platform and I think agents are this agents are the next big wave and so what I would say to all of you is go out and build with AMD we're hoping to unlock this for you unlock this for your business and for your growth but we want to hear from you here the places you get stuck and I think together we can build for this next exciting era of software and build for the agentic revolution.

Thank you so much. Okay, I want to tell you a story about a
