Title: Turbo: Reducing Memory Cost in Agent Retrieval 5x
Speakers: Shashi (Super Agentic)
Event: AI Engineer World's Fair 2026 — Day 3: Harness Engineering & Startup Battlefield (2026-07-02)
Source: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=I2cbIws9j10 (05:55:37 - 06:00:13), YouTube auto-captions
------------------------------------------------------------

Welcome to the online track, Turbocharge Your Agents Retrieval with Turbo. My name is Shashi. I'm a founder of super agentic. Today we will see how you can cut memory cost of agent retrieval five times without breaking your search. Let's get into it. Before we start the talk, let's try to see what problem we're trying to solve. If you have used any coding agent or general purpose agent, you might seen that as context grow the performance degrade. And it is usually because of the KV cache. If you don't know KV cache, think about like history of your conversation. If you have used the cloud-based models, you probably have noted this issue because they handled all the KV cache by themselves.

But if you ever tried loading the model on your own device then you might have seen this issue by yourself. You need to load your model and then you also need to load your context and the KV cache grows as you your context grows and if you push the context far enough your KV cache might get bigger than model size. So if you're using the Mac devices, it gets even worse because your vector index all fight over one shared port full of RAM. So basically one thing is clear that your embeddings are using far more memory than they need to. So by default it use the full precision like 32 bits but search might just need three or four bits.

That means you are wasting the five times memory on your retrieval. So before turboon people use different methods to solve this problem. So one of them is a quantization. So quantisation allows you to t your model into four bit 8 bits that allows the model fits into your memory. Model get compressed and fit into your memory. Next thing you probably see in encoding agent is a context compaction. So when you reach to the end of the context the your context get compacted and it summarized for the next session. Some people use a small embeddings some use offloading of the CPU or disk. But each of this has a trade-off. you have to compromise your quality speed or you probably need a special hardware to do that.

That's where the turbo comes in the picture. So let's see what's the turbo count. So turbocon paper released by the Google research team at ICLR 2026 conference. It is basically a compression algorithm that store embeddings in KV cache in 3 to four bits instead of 32 bits and that's it. Behind the scene it uses the the two techniques. One is polar font is another algorithm and next one is a qjl. So polar font is basically the compress the vector and the QJL fixes any error that has been remaining. So as you can see there's full full paper on this topic. If you if you're from machine learning background you can read this paper but if you're from the software background you might find this paper pretty technical and mathematical.

The Google also released a launch post on the turbo count which explains how it works and they mentioned this QJL techniques which using only one bit and the polar count. So you can go through this blog post if you want. But in a nutshell what Turbocon says is do not store vectors in 32 32bit just just store it into 3 to 4 bit and that's it. The promise of this paper is
