Title: Polygraph: Multi-Repo Meta Harness for Agents
Speakers: Speaker (Unknown)
Event: AI Engineer World's Fair 2026 — Day 3: Harness Engineering & Startup Battlefield (2026-07-02)
Source: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=I2cbIws9j10 (06:22:03 - 06:30:06), YouTube auto-captions
------------------------------------------------------------

Imagine you find a magic lamp in an antique store. You rob it. A genie appears and asks how it can help. You bury it in deadline. So you say, "I need the best engineer to help with an impossible project at work." And the genie grants your wish. For me, the best engineers probably John Carmarmac from his ET days. So, you get Karmarmac. But the genie had a sense of humor and imposes restrictions, maybe for safety. Karma can only see one small part of your codebase, maybe 1,000 of it. And he remembers nothing he did before. Every conversation starts fresh. That would be maddening, right? You would know there is a standard way to do stuff and karma couldn't.

You would have to explain the same thing over and over and over again. You would have a genius on one side and something deeply deficient on the other. And that's what agents are. Let me walk you through an example of how many times we explain things in a simple interaction. We have four reposi module one module 2 and platform. I want to change the UI and propagate the change through the system. Okay. First we change the UI library. Say we I don't know change a button or whatever. That's the first explanation. Unavoidable. We have to express the intent. Okay. Then we publish it. We go to module one and we have to explain what just has happened in a UI library.

So it can consume the package here. Note that that's often a different person, right? Every box in this diagram can be uh done by a different person. And then we discover that the published UI library doesn't work with module one. So we go back uh to UI and we have to reexplain the original change and the issue right because it's a new agent it doesn't know the original change and obviously doesn't know about the issue let's say we fix it right and uh publish it again we go and again we explain the new change in the context of module one same ordeal I mean do the same for module two again and then we go to the platform repo and we explain everything fits together and we implement the change there.

Let's imagine a week after release uh a bug appears in the UI component and uh we have to fix it. So we start an agent to the UI repo and we have to explain again the original change from a week ago and this production issue we see. So we have seven explanations for what essentially is one change and also it may not be one person making all these seven explanations uh but they still occurred right so that's very very typical uh with agents. So how do we solve it? Well uh there are many problems in here that contribute to this experience but they roughly fall into two categories. The first one is uh that an agent essentially is repo bound.

The agent sees and changes generally one repo at a time. It never sees the whole system which can be hundreds or thousands of repos. So that's kind of the space component of the problem. Second is amnesia. The agents forget the work. Every session starts with a blank slate. The human becomes a memory in this case. That's the time component of the problem. Look at the two closer. Take the repo boundary first. Without a model how repos fit together, the agent leans on the human to do the research. It can't align the code with the rest of the system. It couldn't align the UI change with module one. The human didn't explain it. So, a bad version shipped.

It can't reliably reference best practices and standards either because those often live in other repos. Writing is even worse. The agent writes to one repo at a time. It means it can validate changes downstream. A module 1CI should have failed on the UI change, but it didn't. The agent can't update consumers at the same time. Even though, you know, while making the UI change, it has perfect information to do so. It knows exactly what it's doing. So, the user has to reexplain stuff imperfectly to each consumer. Changing something across 20 repos means explaining things 20 times. a lot of developer time spent but also a lot of token burn. The second category is that the agent forgets.

The agent has no episodic memory. Every session is a blank slate and the human in this case becomes the memory. Here what the graph of your work actually looks like. At the bottom there is a repository graph. the artifacts your organization produces plus every open source repo you depend on maybe a thousand repos you own and tens of thousands of open source repos at the top there are all agentic sessions that create and modify that code session relates to each other repos relate to each other so this graph is a faithful picture of the work in your organization it describes what there at the bottom and how it came to be at the top. That's what you want your agent to see here.

What it actually sees there is one session, one small fraction of your codebase, no memory. Okay? Because it sees so little, it leans on the one who understands the system, the developer. Every developer has a part of that graph, right, in their head, at least in the domain. They know the agent generally speaking doesn't if this doesn't sound crazy right imagine an agent that could see one file at a time maximum and can only look five messages back sort of constraint again both in space what can see and time how far in the past could see you would say that's impossible to work in what we have now is similar to that crazy picture and the more complex the organization is the more appar apparent it becomes.

I'll show you how we solved it. Other organizations I talked to have similar solutions. So, uh look at the problem and the solution conceptually, not a specific tool. Although the tool is pretty cool, we built uh an agent agnostic meta harness called Polygraph. Okay, let me show you what it does and how it fixes the issues we just discussed. The first idea that we uh arrived at is that if a GitHub user, any user has access to thousands of repos, some of them they own, many of them are open source, we can analyze them and extract a lot of metadata out of them to build unified dependency graph. Uh no line of code changes in those repo that all happens kind of on a side, right?

And then we can get this metadata and feed it to the meta hardness and create an illusion of one big code base the agent can read and write anywhere. This is my personal graph. I only have about 300 repos I own, right? And thousands of open source repos my projects depend on. Polygraph computes what each one produces. each repo, each project in each reper, what each project in each repo consumes package wise, what API they produce and consume and look. Hey everyone, thanks for coming. I'm
