Title: Hiring Employable Agents: Product Form Factors for Agentic Systems
Speakers: Howie Liu (Airtable / Hyper Agent)
Event: AI Engineer World's Fair 2026 — Day 3: Harness Engineering & Startup Battlefield (2026-07-02)
Source: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=I2cbIws9j10 (08:19:24 - 08:36:18), YouTube auto-captions
------------------------------------------------------------

Please join me in welcoming the chief executive officer at Hyper Agent, Howy Lou. All right. Hello. Um, who's excited about the end of this event? This this has been an amazing few days. Amazing talks, amazing uh Gary talk right there. And by the way, I've never been introduced with so much base. I am very very pumped in this moment. Um so I consider myself a product thinker at heart. Meaning you know as much as I like to spend time on the technical side of building and you know I I love to think about architecture and algorithms and so on. You know really I'm a product form factor thinker at heart. And you know what I want to end today off with is a brief and kind of highle overview of how I see the world going with agents as it relates to product form factors.

So I'm calling this hiring employable agents and it's really a reflection on as these models have gotten better and better and we've heard from some really really great speakers about you know the latest uh frontier models whether GLM 5.2 uh or others and how to coax the most um performance out of them. And really this is not about the technical deep dive but how do we think about these from a product building standpoint. So who am I? I'm the founder and CEO of Air Tableable and also know Hyper agent which is a product within Air Table and as many of you already know Air Table is basically a almost laughably horizontal platform. uh when we in fact set out to build the company almost 12 years ago, we got you know basically this negative feedback from virtually every investor we talked to early on which was you know you can't possibly go out with a horizontal platform approach and try to build something that is everything for everyone like any type of app that people want to build you know you can't solve all of those use cases and you know I think we ended up doing a pretty good job of solving for many of them at least and solving for a large builder community and we're basically applying a very very similar philosophy to agents now.

And I'm going to break down how we're doing it. So, um, when I zoom out and think about the progression of models and therefore the product form factors they enable, I really see it as this spectrum, right? So, we went from basically completions, which is, you know, you give a model, one of these LLMs, a, you know, string of tokens and it just, you know, continues emitting more tokens until it gets to a stop token and more or less it would just kind of complete your thought, right? or complete um the pattern and you know until instruct GBT happened and enabled a chat form factor it was like arguably powerful but more narrowly applicable once we got to a higher level of model intelligence and then also the kind of innovation of instruct and kind of tuning these models to actually have more of a conversational back and forth behavior with users then we enabled the chatbot right and of course we all know chatbt was an awesome breakout product we're now all very very intimately familiar with that form factor of AI.

The next level I call an agent, right? And you know, I think agent has been very overloaded. Um, we've probably talked about that a ton over the past few days, but my definition of agent really is the same as the anthropic definition, which is distinct from workflows. And an agent is really a model that recurses upon itself, right? And has, you know, the the open-ended set of tools that it can call, of reasoning steps it can make, of decisions it can make. So, it's not prescripted to a linear workflow, but it can kind of make an open-ended set of choices. Um, still, you know, I like to think of agents as being a little bit distinct from the next level of agents, which I'm using the term claw here because openclaw obviously has has popularized uh this concept.

But, you know, there's a market shift that I see from agents that were still mostly reactive um, you know, to user input. So, you would have an agent go and perform a task. It might spend 20 minutes maybe up to an hour to perform the task and then it completes. Claws um as I call them are really you know about agents that go and perform work for much longer right they can even have a mechanism like the heartbeat mechanism within openclaw um and now in other products like hyper agent that enable them to wake up on their own and almost like um exhibit this always on behavior. I mean underneath the hood what's happening is you know each wake up basically results in many different turns.

So the agent loops upon itself. It's performing tool calls. Each tool call response then invokes the the LLM again until it reaches a stopping point, but then that stopping point gets reinvoked or or kind of restarted with a heartbeat mechanism where you can wake up the agent again and again, right? And so this idea of this always on agent that's actually constantly moving towards its goal and kind of figure out creatively how to unblock itself where maybe prior agents would get stuck. I think that's a really really important kind of next form factor uh leap that we're seeing. And then finally, as you think about models that are now capable of, you know, really really intelligent orchestration of complex tasks, right?

Um so I've personally been using the workflows capability in uh cloud code quite a bit uh where it can fan out a lot of work to a massively parallel set of uh of agents. Um but this concept of you know this agent that can go and orchestrate with other agents, right? an agent-to-agent interaction um to perform even more advanced tasks uh right longer running jobs is I think the next leap yet all of this is enabled because the models are getting smarter and smarter to the point where they can achieve coherence even on longer and more open-ended scoped problems right um if you recall back to the days of um uh baby AGI and autogbt those were really kind of fun cool science experiments but ultimately you know as much as they were really interesting to watch and you know see them work for hours and hours on a problem, they would all inevitably you know kind of end up drifting off to something not super useful, right?

It would go off into a rabbit hole and kind of get stuck. And I think now the models are actually smart enough to enable not only longer running jobs but actually enable us to start applying these kind of organizational principles to break down problems into differently scoped tasks that different agents can hand off to each other. All of which is about managing each agent's task uh or context window and ability to coordinate work with each other. So all this is kind of abstract. I want to make it very very tangible and show you how we've applied some of that design thinking of building a horizontal product and distilling a lot of the complexity of agents like we did for building a database or a database to powered app with air table for agents in hyper agent.

So this is a um a very realistic use case based on some of our actual customer usage. One of the interesting things we found from launching hyper agent is you know the the uh prototypical users for hyper agent are not who you would think they are right. I mean, we definitely get our fair share of like the super AI forward, you know, kind of pure software companies, like AI companies themselves, but we also get really interesting other companies that are, you know, sometimes like traditionally offline businesses. And in this case, we're depicting a very realistic scenario, which is um a customer uh that is in a landscaping business and actually uses agents to run virtually end to end every part of their business, which is finding clients to propose landscaping projects to like physically going and like redoing their garden or their backyard and end to end managing everything from the prospecting to building a quote and a pitch to managing the work itself.

And I think this is a huge huge um interesting um insight that you know I've just kind of stumbled on from working on hyper agent which is ingenuity of agent builders is not contained to just AI companies or software companies. Um and I was really inspired by Gary's talk just a second ago. I think the the uh the motive behind that applies to every industry every sector and there are really really creative people many of whom are in this room who can go out and disrupt your own industry whatever it be. You know, it doesn't have to be a pure software business. Um, but I think all it takes is the ability to imagine what work could look like when you do go and become fully not just an AI native company, but I like to use the term, you know, a fully fleet of agents native company where you're actually going above and beyond and not just thinking about small kind of narrow steps to automate with AI, but actually how to employ a whole fleet of agents that have governed behavior and have the right context and the right tools to be able to do really useful and very end-to-end autonomous work.

So, let's walk through what this looks like. Um, this is a realistic example of, you know, in this business, this uh this landscaper wants to go and pitch clients, right? So, you know, they get all these inbound uh submissions of clients who are interested. Somebody submits this inquiry saying, "Hey, here's my current backyard. You know, it's a little messy. Here's my info. Like, can you give me a quote and show me a proposal of what you could do?" This basically gets routed into a um in into one agent that is the triager agent, right? And so this agent is basically taking in this intake and saying, "Hey, like what is the um the scope of the project, you know, like is this something we want to take on and is this a quality lead?

Is this a legit person?" And so it does some research, but ultimately it hands off then the work to another agent, a surveyor agent, to actually go and then look at the um the physical landscape of this person's backyard and come up with a proposal of what a rellandscape version of that could look like. So here um the surveyor agent is going and looking at the original imagery uh or even video that the um submitter gave them. Um hyper agent uh in our case works with a fully um capable sandbox VM. So every agent in fact every thread with an agent is able to fully write code. It can manipulate files. You can actually use things like ffmpeg to like, you know, clip out individual screenshots from a video file and then analyze those um and actually go through and like find all the relevant information to create a fairly high quality um and hightouch uh proposal that would have been unfathomable for a small business like this before, right?

If you think about like a really high-end interior designer or maybe like a very high-end landscaper, maybe they could do a very bespoke proposal like this for like a $5 million plus uh client, you know, if they're working for a big hotel or something. But it would have been unheard of to do something this hightouch and actually mock up real imagery and a real client pitch deck for, you know, just a small backyard landscaping proposal. But this person has done it because they've they figured out how to use agents in an extremely capable and autonomous way to do the job that otherwise would have been undoable by humans. And so what happens next is you know the surveyor agent it it went and created this proposal and pitch and now the intervention has to go back to the human like there is a step where humans still need to unblock the agents right Sarah Guo put out a great post uh a few weeks ago about you know just describing like where the value is going to acrue in this AI landscape as things evolve and models get smarter and I firmly agree with her take which was you know the ultimate blocker to still be able to deploy useful agents there's still a human element to that you know As much as models are getting smarter, the ability for agents to get unblocked by humans that still own policies and decisions and really importantly just kind of gate, you know, really critical um high impact actions like in this case actually making a pitch to a customer that has a binding quote um or perhaps like agreeing to do the work that becomes something that the human then intervenes at just like a great manager who's getting upwards uh reports or you know upwards work updates from their team to then unblock.

So here we have Sage who has come back to uh the real human uh owner of this business and saying hey here's a lead I already surveyed the the project here's a beautiful pitch deck and a proposal and have come up with a realistic quote based on all the factors I've already surveyed in this uh particular project to give to uh to you to now approve sending to the client and see if they accept it right and you can see like even the u the proposal itself is this really beautiful kind of interactive uh web page That again would have been unfathomable for a business like this to be able to send to every single client even for small tasks uh or jobs like a $10,000 landscaping proposal, right?

Um you know, better yet, as you interact with these agents, you know, as as Gary talked about with Gbrain and and just kind of like creating this very um sticky context layer that learns with every interaction. I completely agree. I think that is a you know kind of a universal principle and kind of a form factor for useful agents going forward is agents should not be static. They should not just be you know either static LLM calls or static even agents that just have a prompt and you know some static skills. They really need to learn with every interaction right and you can't wait for the next you know kind of fine-tuning run of your own models where you have you know a bunch of collected data or rubrics to to retrain the model.

It should learn in real time, right? It should accumulate the memories and skill updates and just take user feedback and actually learn from real world performance to constantly adjust and get better just like humans do. And so in this case you can see you know within Slack or you know in our case within uh either Slack or email or other um invocation methods you can basically go back and forth with the agent just like a real human and say hey like you know remember to take this into account next time you kind of you know here's something differently uh formatted or a different way to think about the proposal or you missed kind of um this additional cost lever in this particular project.

So, you know, remember that for next time. And I think it's critical that in this next generation of agents, agents need to remember these things, right? Um they should feel fluid and and um evolving just like humans are in order for them to fully realize the potential that the latest frontier model capabilities enable them to to actually go and do in terms of autonomy. Um, and then finally, I think what ends up happening at the end of all of this is with all of these agents that are each individually capable and even interacting with each other, I think the job of the human becomes increasingly about unblocking agents to be able to do work effectively.

And so, you know, I I compare this to the development workflows that uh have evolved from, you know, originally before any um, you know, kind of AI enabled coding, obviously, we just sat in front of a computer. We as humans are pretty singlethreaded, right? You'd stare at one code file, you'd think about a problem, you'd kind of bang out some code, maybe take a break, come back to it to then we had um augmented coding with the first generation of GitHub copilot and similar tools where I mean I think of that as really just a completions form factor on coding. You type some code, it can autocomplete a few extra lines to then we had things like cursor composer 1.0 0 like the original uh experience not the the composer model um but the chat experience where you could talk to this agent it would do more complex changes and that was even more leverage right but we're now moving to this point where you know the best frontier agentic developers I know and many of you are sitting in this room are are really just kind of overseeing a fleet of agents right like in fact going to sleep without setting off your agents to perform useful work overnight feels like you're you're taking this huge loss like your your team is not working because you're not unblocking And so the UX of how you oversee these agents, whether it's in development workflows or general purpose work like this landscaping example needs to shift as well.

And so the way we've thought about that is you need to see this kind of orchestration control plane where you can see at a glance what all of your agents are working on, what they're blocked on, who's handing off work to each other, and your job becomes almost like, you know, zooming out to see the entire Sim City landscape and orchestrating across everything going on at a macro level between your different agents rather than going and having to play micro and zoom into each individual project or each individual task. Um and so I think this is a really really exciting moment as we have shifted from you know not just completions and kind of the slight augmentation of existing human uh work but really a radical now leap into humans as orchestrators of agents that also can orchestrate themselves.

And finding the right way for us to interact with those agents as they become more and more capable is going to become not just the opportunity to boil the ocean, but in my opinion, table stakes for survival for every company in every industry. This is going to be the way to get ahead and thrive in your industry. And if you don't, you know, as Jensen put it, you know, it's not going to be AI taking your job. It's going to be, you know, somebody using AI who takes your job or takes your business. So really really excited both for the opportunity and for everyone in this room to be part of this um transformation and this really kind of bold leap into the next form factor of AI.

Um all that being said, we'd love to see you try Hyper Agent. So hyperaggent.com/ie and you get $1,000 of inference credit.
