Title: Startup Battlefield: Live Pitches, Judging & Awards
Speakers: Howie Liu (Airtable), Joshua Xu (HeyGen), swyx (AI Engineer), Theo Browne (T3 Tools) + finalist founders
Event: AI Engineer World's Fair 2026 — Day 3: Harness Engineering & Startup Battlefield (2026-07-02)
Source: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=I2cbIws9j10 (08:36:30 - 09:08:30), YouTube auto-captions
------------------------------------------------------------

you do with uh with agents on Hyper Agent or elsewhere. Thank you all for being here. How are you again? Thank you for joining us. Thank you. Um so for the close of our events uh a few months ago I saw that hyper agent was launching this startup competition and at AIE we've always wanted to feature some kind of battlefield for like a competition and a contest for people uh and we didn't really have any sort of mechanism by which to judge or to fund it or anything like that and hyper agent came along and they had this uh 500 founders y right what was the inspiration for that you know I I think um as I think about the multiple layers of disruption stacking, you know, we we're going as I said from, you know, just humans doing the same work they were augmented a little bit by AI to now humans overseeing fleets of agents doing work that wasn't before possible like this landscaper running his business in a fundamentally different way to now this entirely new economy of agent native companies being built.

And so, you know, really the founding 500 is about betting on the most frontier part of that economy as possible, right? It's the most agentically leveraged companies that are not only out disrupting their space but kind of defining an entirely new playbook for how companies in this new era will be run. And I think the leverage we're already seeing from some of these uh these companies that are running in this way like Gary said like it's profound. I mean it's far more than even being like an early software leveraged or internet leveraged company. So really really you know kind of big believer that this subset of the economy is going to have explosive growth far higher than any other sector and it's going to cut across not just you know the tech industry software industry but every industry.

Yeah. Uh in my London keynote I always often talk about how uh work agents are eating the rest of work and being accessible to nontechnical teams. In fact my team is right there back now because AIE runs on air table uh and they're so excited to meet you and so excited to to work with hyper agents. Um so from 500 founders we you guys pre-seelelected 20 they competed today in the start of battlefields. Uh three have emerged as finalists. Let's introduce them. Um so I don't know if I'm supposed to to click this. Uh but uh first of all I'm just going to go to introduce uh our dear judges. I think uh we're going to have Theo and Joshua.

Um thank you from Hen. And uh we I think we'll we'll we'll sort of uh have them uh judging there. Uh but also we're going to uh go into the format and the background as well. Uh so basically what we're going to do uh we um the Hyper Asian team has kindly put up $100,000 in prizes and basically what this is is a competition for whoever is going to be the most impressive uh winners. So uh 50k to the winners um 30k to runner up 20k to second runner up. Uh we're gonna have a hype video that is uh thankfully um created by Hyperframes and Hunen. Uh we have fun pitches and Q&A with the judges and then we'll also get to the next uh uh pitch as well.

So just three quick pitches back toback. Um and basically we decided that we really wanted some kind of judging in terms of like what is impressive and usage of this technology and like why it matters. Um it's not an investment pitch so much as like you know it's not like a VC pitch so much as like well why should you care why is this an interesting use of technology and and why um you know why are you like an interesting founder that people should know um and so I'm very excited to announce like the winning teams. Uh so I think first of all we're going to introduce um come on Spiro come on the stage.

All right. Thank you. Um I think you guys are gonna take over and present. Yeah. All right. Do you have your clickers or you got you got your you're gonna kick it off? Okay. Hey everyone, I'm Spirro Anakos, one of the founders of Kamad. This is Dom and I'm Nick Nakos. We are the founders of Kamad. Kamad has identified physical commodity trade. From the rice you eat to the gold chain you're wearing to the chip in your smartphone to the gas you're putting in your car to every single copper pipe running through our data centers. Physical commodities power the world. But the global trade system is broken. Trillions move annually. Yet hundreds of billions are lost annually due to fraud, fragmentation, and the sheer complexity of coordinating global trade.

Kamad has taken that complexity and transformed it into an agentic execution layer. Our proprietary CFC state machine governs specialized agents that verify, execute, and settle trades entirely. And then, you know, people ask, why is this so complicated? And if you think about it, it's like, well, it's every country in the world, every resource, all of their different currencies, and all of their different banking laws. So, of course, it's inevitably going to be a disaster, right? But with AI, it's finally solvable. So, we're very excited to have you here. We also have our our first customer in the crowd out of the UAE U trading company based in Dubai, and he moves several hundreds of millions of volume in trade every single year, and uh he's proved the product.

So, we're excited to be here today and thank you for the opportunity. 17 trillion dollars in physical commodities move every year. The world runs on them, yet it still moves on paper, email, and a handshake. No one knows who is real or if the documents are the result. Billions lost. Kamad plugs into the stack you already run. Gmail, Slack, Stripe, Salesforce, WhatsApp, and more. A deal begins. Agents screen both sides. KYC identity sanctions in seconds. Forensics catch document fraud instantly. A private deal room spins up. Shipping and logistics partners link in with live pricing. Then an agent swarm structures the deal in parallel. Compliance, legal, currency, banking, shipping, settlement, weeks of work in minutes. The swarm obeys one protocol, the CFC.

Our patent filed state machine. Agents advance only by clearing every deny condition. It cannot move until the evidence is real. Settlement eligible. It never touches the funds. It emits the signal. Your bank moves the money. 30 days closed in minutes. Commodities. Can't see the video on the confidence monitor. What happens now? I don't know. Is it on me? Yes. Um I I I realized that we didn't get you a mic. So, uh, are you're still miked up at the end of Oh, you're all miked up. Okay, great. Um, so I think we have a little bit of a Q&A session. Yeah. So, are we supposed to ask questions or what? Exactly. My team agreed to this, not me.

Wait, why are you guys playing this? Joshua, you want to go? Uh, sure. I'm very interested in the um the second project, common.io. And you know certainly we need a share space for agent to collaborate together. Just curious have you thought about having that format to be HTML versus like markdown file? How you've been thinking about it? What is this? Sorry. All right. Sure. Yeah. Don't Yeah. I was just saying that you know um um the second project common.io is about That's the next one. Yeah. Oh, the next one. We're asking them about the first one. Uh so I'll ask a question. This is one of those types of products that's really hard to build because it requires so much domain specific knowledge as well as like the building out of all of these pieces to collect the information needed for the product.

A lot of the concern I have with modern startups is the thing that they're building is eventually going to be a feature of a sufficiently intelligent model. Do you see a future where the models get capable enough and the tools they're given by anthropic and OpenAI could compete with you guys if they were to get smart enough and build in the right directions? ticket. So in commodities trade, it's very specific as to what data is being pulled. And what we've done with our orchestration layer is set the gates for each agent. So they're pulling from real databases and have that context themselves. Whereas you're talking about gold, oil, grain, whatever it may be, there's certain procedures that only industry experts really know and have the documents and the information to pull that in.

Which is why we've partnered with Connor and a few other partners to bring in all that data. uh and I have domain experience as well to know what's real, what's not and to train the agents based upon that. So to your question, could that happen? They can learn more for sure on the open internet, but this is a private industry with a lot of sensitive information and they have to learn upon and train upon certain data in order to progress and become experts in that domain. So it sounds like relatively bespoke in the sense that like every company's a bit different. You need to get everything for them. How many customers would it take for this to become a billion dollar company or to hit like I don't know 100 mil ar like how many customers you think it would take to get there?

It's about 100 uh 100 customers total huge. It's also important to mention as well like the tickets in this industry are massive on on deal sizes. It's not like a Stripe for example processing microtransactions. One transaction might be you know $200 million or north of that. and one partner such as a refinery, many of them transact 9 to12 billion dollars a month. So getting in at that level, charging per deal on that changes the whole landscape of what we're able to earn and what we're able to be valued at. I just want to add one more piece as well. Our solution is endtoend. So you know the solution serves the entire supply chain, but the wedge ultimately into the industry is the traders and the banks.

Banks pulled out of physical commodities trading years ago after the fraud became so rampant. So this unlocks a tremendous amount of liquidity as well by the audit trails and the immutability that we give uh into the commodity and the trade itself. So there's a lot to love about this business. I think like in many ways it's like checks all the boxes on like the classic like here is the ideal vertical agent business to build. Like if you look at the the YC kind of like RFS for vertical agents like this is like the perfect application in the right the right kind of sector. like there's lots of money up for grabs and there's a lot of like domain specific stuff that you have to do that creates I think a good defensible moat.

Um I think my perspective is more like you know what do you do to keep up with the changing competitive landscape and just you know as models progress how do you need to evolve your product to stay competitive right so it's less about is this a relevant and great business today and more about what changes over the next two three years or even like next year that impacts you in a way that you know it doesn't necessarily mean like enthropic opening eye eats your lunch but what do you need to do to stay you know kind of at the frontier and be a better product. Yeah, I think like the only thing that's actually defensible is being the most creative in your category regardless of which product you're creating, right?

Like truly nothing's defensible other than being the most creative, right? Anybody these days has a product, but we actually do like the anthropic eat your lunch model. Like we like the ship extinction model where we ship and then 10 companies go extinct the next day. So um yeah, it's aggressive shipping and product superiority, but then ultimately we're going to win on distribution. What are you most excited about on your upcoming road map if you can share? becoming the bank. Yeah, it's exciting. Thank you so much. Awesome. Awesome. Give it up and come on. Uh we're going to invite the next team on now. Uh if you want to come back here. Thank you. Appreciate it.

Yeah, that's awesome. Thanks. Um and up next we have Max Windbomb and the team from Common I.O. Come on, Max. Oh, you're going to play the video. All right. Come on. All right. Play the video. That was That's the right All right, welcome in. Come on, guys. Oh, thank you. Um, if you could, uh, so we have a little bit of a technical snafu where the judges couldn't see the video. Okay. Uh we have to describe a little bit just to just to prompt things off before you if you sort of before you get into the whole pitch. Yeah. Okay. Pretend like we're a non multimodal model. We just we only accept text. So uh yeah text.io is a uh it's a multiplayer markdown editor.

It's uh focused on making the best documents um for the modern work which is people in agents. But what you would have seen on the video is a familiar document editor interface, but people and agents are popping in. They're notifying each other. Everyone can call anyone in. Um, and that's that's basically the gist. Awesome. All right. So, um, it's Friday afternoon, ready to go home, packing up your laptop, and all of a sudden you're hearing dings around the office, servers down, big outage. So, you put down your bag, you head into the conference room, and you're pulling out your laptop. There's one question on your mind. What is going on, Claude? And you're entering that in.

You're waiting a few minutes. Give me some ideas. It's culminating or whatever. And then it gives you some ideas. And the first thing you do is you tell everyone else in the room the ideas so they can put it into their clots. And then someone else has a different idea. And then they let you know, and then you put it into your clot. And you real, how did we get here? How is this the job? There has to be a better way. And there is. It's agents and the pe who are doing the work and people who own the problem sharing context in real time. But how? Think of the productivity software that you all use, the collaboration software.

Can you just like drop your coding agents into them and have them working with each other? No, you can't because they were built for people, not for agents. And that's why we're making comment. It is the multiplayer markdown editor. It is we're laser focused on making it the best document platform for modern work for people and for agents. It's open. It's pluggable. That's key for enterprises. It's key for it's key for developers. And it's wrapped in a user experience that is super familiar. I started my career in productivity bringing collaboration features into Microsoft Word. Max and I worked together um at Texio, the first AI native writing software. Six years before chat, we were deploying companywide rollouts of AI writing software to the Fortune 500.

We've been doing this a long time. The market for comment is expanding with agents. As more and more people use agents, more people are going to need the ability for agents to share context in a product that is built for agents but designed for people working together even in the highest stake circumstances. Awesome. I love the shape of this business because it's like the inverse of what we just heard from the um the commod guys, right? Like they went super vertically deep. they're trying to extract a lot of value out of a very deep um you know domain and you guys are going super broad and arguably maybe a little thinner but by intention right and I don't say that as a as a detriment at all like I think you know one way to think about the landscape here is like the agent economy is going to be so large there's just so much money flowing through agents like literally the token spend right and if you can be a product that like even a one to you know 2% uh amount of those tokens touches like you can be a very valuable even if like the per uh per call or per usage um you know kind of uh metric uh you know kind of margin extraction or revenue is is relatively low you can be a very cheap very fast very um broad product and still gain a lot of scale right so I think it's a really really interesting shape of product um what have you found is like the most surprising learnings from like a product design or product affordances standpoint to make this product better for agents than like the human designed equivalents right like why not just have agents collaborate on a Google doc right or even try to use like GitHub as the uh you know kind of repo not just for code but for markdown.

All writing software today is horrible for agents to use. Software like Google Docs has a really terrible format. It has an MCP. You can send a document there. You can have your agent read a document from there but you can't have them collaborate in real time. And that's critical for all kinds of real work that needs to happen. And as more agents join the workforce, they need to be in there with your documents. And as we've talked to our users, people who love working in documents, who rely on documents for their day-to-day, need to bring their agents because they're starting to use agents, too. It's not just developers anymore. Okay. I think I'll mention it.

Oh, final closing words. I was just going to say the other thing I'll mention is that I've been super surprised about um talking to people at this conference when we've talked to them is how many people have said I've rolled my own like visual markdown editor that other people can look at so people can look and then you're like ah but I gave up I just rendered an HTML document instead like it's a hard problem and you need dedicated like focus on making it great and that's kind of what we're doing. Awesome. All right. Nice job guys. Thank you so much. Uh next for and last team to compete. We're going to play the video by Foundry.

Content creators don't have time to build a business, so they have to hire an agency. It's expensive, slow, and risky. Built by Foundry replaces the agency and lets creators launch their own products faster and cheaper. Our AI agents build the business end to end. The creator launches it. We keep growing the revenue. Type in any creator's handle and our agents become their biggest fans, watching their videos, reading their comments, and finding a painkiller their audience would actually pay for. We've done this for creators of every size and over half a million people use products our agents built. The cost of building software is approaching zero. What's left is trust and taste and no one has more of it than creators.

We're building the agentic product team that is going to turn every creator into a founder. Woo! Foundry team, come on up. Thank you. Thanks, Max. Hello, Aie. I am Weston Belgettes. I'm the founder and CEO of Built by Foundry. We're going to turn every content creator into a founder of their very own company. And I have great news today. I think we found the formula for a winning business. You take your unique expertise and turn it into a product. And you solve cold start with your built-in distribution. Theo, you you did this with T3 Chat. Yeah. It sucked. It doesn't work. It works great for our our our users, but uh Gary did it with with G uh GStack and Gbrain.

And uh what what we find is that if we help uh creators to take a step back and solve a real pain point that their users have, so we're not just making another Patreon for that, paywalling this content. We're helping them solve a real pain point behind that. And that's what our agents are experts in is finding the pain point within the users's problems. And our companies have uh built over uh many different niches and uh different sizes of sha and shapes of creators. And really what we're building is we want to give the power back to the content creator. They're stuck in these I worked at Tik Tok for two years and and I met with hundreds of creators who are stuck just doing brand deals or affiliate links or selling $20 PDFs in their link in bio and they are one step away from building their own business.

They just need someone to help them. And that's what our agents do. At Built by Foundry, we deploy teams of agents to build recurring revenue businesses for content creators so that they can focus on posting and posting and posting and we can keep growing their revenue. I have a lot of thoughts on this one. Okay. So, the problem I find as a creator, even with the brands I work with, is that there is a saturation point where it stops being useful to talk about a given product with my audience. Like with me, for Versell, for example, there was quickly a point where everybody in my audience either was a Verscell user and doesn't want me to show it to them anymore, or they won't be a Versel user, and they don't want me to talk about it anymore.

It is very easy to hit the saturation point and the best solution is to have a much broader set of things to show your audience. One of the best things I ever did for myself, the single moment that has had the most positive impact on myself, my career, my businesses, and my income has been going from having four sponsors to 80 because now there's a wider variety of things to bring my audience. And even if 80% of them aren't relevant to them, the 20% that is is now conversion I'm getting that I wouldn't have otherwise. the variety of what I bring to my audience is where I find the most value by far and every creator I've worked with ultimately has come to a similar conclusion.

That said, you're touching on really important pieces here. Creators do have more taste than most founders. Creators do have better distribution than most companies. Creators know their audience better than most businesses. And you've built a machine that identifies that, but it doesn't provide the solution to that other problem, which is you have to bring variety to your audience. Where I could see this working really well is as a tool that businesses use when they identify a creator is overlapping with the archetype of customer they're looking for to help that business build better things for Theo. And I've told this to so many businesses that want to work with me. Watch my streams, watch my videos, find the problems I have, and then show me how your product solves them.

That's a way better pitch than going to try and start your own company as a YouTuber. As the YouTuber who has started the second most companies, as far as I'm aware, it doesn't work. It just burns you out and it burns your audience out too. The best thing you can do is work with companies to teach them what your audience wants and for them to come to you with money to show it to those audience or those audience members. I understand and I will say your niche as a tech creator is one that is very challenging because there's a lot of options. Um and what we have found is that for all of our creators, I'll just few examples.

Um, one one creator's name is Brandon and he does homesteading content and he always loses track of uh the best settings on his freeze dryer, which sounds ridiculous to us, but to his 2 million followers, that's a real pain point. And now they pay him a recurring revenue monthly or monthly or yearly subscription to solve that specific pain point. So, I think unfortunately, Theo, you've picked a bad niche. I'm sorry, but um if you want to pivot to homesteading or gardening, maybe uh we could we could work together. But I I'd say primarily whatever the users niche is apart from tech and maybe com comedians, we've been able to take a step back. Our agents find a painoint that they're willing to pay for and zero creators across our entire company history have ever left our our company because they always are profitable.

You're very convincing. Okay, excellent. Then give it up for Yeah. Thank you. Um, so we're going to have a little bit of a deliberation moment. Uh, the judge is going to go backstage for a couple minutes. In the meantime, sorry. Okay. In the meantime, we've, uh, prepared this little video recapping the World's Fair. So, take your time, judges. This is our biggest AI engineer. event ever. We're constantly adding new techniques for you to draw. Heat. Heat. Hey, hey, hey. Thank you so much. All right. Um I think we're inviting everyone back on stage. Give it up for the start of Battlefield. Um, congrats guys. Yes. Okay. So, uh, we have some prizes that we're going to hand out.

I think, um, the folks back there are doing some checks. Um, in second runner up place, we have Kimode. Uh, Theo, I think you're presenting. Uh, Theo. Yes. Okay, we'll take some pictures as well for the team. All right. Um, next, and I guess this also reveals the order. Uh, we have Foundry as runner up. Great pitch, Max. Great pitch. Congrats. Awesome. All right, no secrets now for the grand prize. comment I io welcome. Great video as well. Congratulations. Well deserved. Do you want to also do the group photo? I think we're doing all of us. Um, yes. Okay. All right. Let it be just them. They're the founders. We're just here to com everyone.

Fine. We'll sneak in. Get them. Come on in. Yes. All right. Thank you so much guys on building with hyper agent and yeah of course um any last words that you wanted to comment on. I think you guys uh briefed a little bit. Yeah. Yeah. I just want to thank uh sorry about thank everyone here at AIE? We got amazing feedback um through the whole um time and uh hyper agent um for inviting us to this and hyper fans for helping us with the video and uh overall like so much. Check us out. It's free. comment.io. All right, that's it. Thank you. Ladies and gentlemen, please welcome back to the stage our MC developer relations engineer at Replet, Ralph Shabri.

Hot. Okay, so let's give it up to our startup Battlefields finalist. All right, they collectively won 100K worth of prize to boost out their the their project. So, this is great. Um, all right. Let's give it up also to all our judges, Josh, Howie, and Theo. All right, my next slide. Clicker not working. Next slide, please. Clicker not working. Okay. All right. And with that, AI Engineer Welfare 2026 is a wrap. And we've come a long way. This year's edition is our most ambitious one. 4 days, 7,000 attendees, keynote sessions, countless of workshops, conversations, demos, 40 tracks. And we hope that you find this content useful and helpful, and that you're going to go back home inspired.

But what we love to see more than anything else is the community coming together, creating new connections, new friendships, exchanging ideas, and building together. And we're extremely grateful to be part of this. So, let's give it up for you guys. All right. We're also very extremely grateful to our sponsors. So, please let's give it up to our presenting sponsor, Microsoft. and also to our lab and platinum sponsors. Please, let's keep it going.
